## mn117, continued
mn117:28.1 | S: In this context, right view comes first. | T: Livelihood “Therein, bhikkhus, right view comes first.
mn117:28.2 | S: And how does right view come first? | T: And how does right view come first?
mn117:28.3 | S: When you understand wrong livelihood as wrong livelihood and right livelihood as right livelihood, that’s your right view. | T: One understands wrong livelihood as wrong livelihood and right livelihood as right livelihood: this is one’s right view.
mn117:29.1 | S: And what is wrong livelihood? | T: “And what, bhikkhus, is wrong livelihood?
mn117:29.2 | S: Fawning, flattery, hinting, and belittling, and using material things to chase after other material things. | T: Scheming, talking, hinting, belittling, pursuing gain with gain:
mn117:29.3 | S: This is wrong livelihood. | T: this is wrong livelihood.
mn117:30.1 | S: And what is right livelihood? | T: “And what, bhikkhus, is right livelihood?
mn117:30.2 | S: Right livelihood is twofold, I say. | T: Right livelihood, I say, is twofold:
mn117:30.3 | S: There is right livelihood that is accompanied by defilements, partakes of good deeds, and ripens in attachments. | T: there is right livelihood that is affected by taints, partaking of merit, ripening in the acquisitions;
mn117:30.4 | S: And there is right livelihood that is noble, undefiled, transcendent, a factor of the path. | T: and there is right livelihood that is noble, taintless, supramundane, a factor of the path.
mn117:31.1 | S: And what is right livelihood that is accompanied by defilements, partakes of good deeds, and ripens in attachments? | T: “And what, bhikkhus, is right livelihood that is affected by taints, partaking of merit, ripening in the acquisitions?
mn117:31.2 | S: It’s when a noble disciple gives up wrong livelihood and earns a living by right livelihood. | T: Here, bhikkhus, a noble disciple abandons wrong livelihood and gains his living by right livelihood:
mn117:31.3 | S: This is right livelihood that is accompanied by defilements. | T: this is right livelihood that is affected by taints…ripening in the acquisitions.
mn117:32.1 | S: And what is right livelihood that is noble, undefiled, transcendent, a factor of the path? | T: “And what, bhikkhus, is right livelihood that is noble, taintless, supramundane, a factor of the path?
mn117:32.2 | S: It’s the desisting, abstaining, abstinence, and refraining from wrong livelihood in one intent on the noble, intent on the undefiled, who possesses the noble path and develops the noble path. | T: The desisting from wrong livelihood, the abstaining, refraining, abstinence from it in one whose mind is noble, whose mind is taintless, who possesses the noble path and is developing the noble path:
mn117:32.3 | S: This is right livelihood that is noble. | T: this is right livelihood that is noble…a factor of the path.
mn117:33.1 | S: They make an effort to give up wrong livelihood and embrace right livelihood: that’s their right effort. | T: “One makes an effort to abandon wrong livelihood and to enter upon right livelihood: this is one’s right effort.
mn117:33.2 | S: Mindfully they give up wrong livelihood and take up right livelihood: that’s their right mindfulness. | T: Mindfully one abandons wrong livelihood, mindfully one enters upon and dwells in right livelihood: this is one’s right mindfulness.
mn117:33.3 | S: So these three things keep running and circling around right livelihood, namely: right view, right effort, and right mindfulness. | T: Thus these three states run and circle around right livelihood, that is, right view, right effort, and right mindfulness.
mn117:34.1 | S: In this context, right view comes first. | T: The Great Forty “Therein, bhikkhus, right view comes first.
mn117:34.2 | S: And how does right view come first? | T: And how does right view come first?
mn117:34.3 | S: Right view produces right purpose. Right purpose produces right speech. Right speech produces right action. Right action produces right livelihood. Right livelihood produces right effort. Right effort produces right mindfulness. Right mindfulness produces right immersion. Right immersion produces right knowledge. Right knowledge produces right freedom. | T: In one of right view, right intention comes into being; in one of right intention, right speech comes into being; in one of right speech, right action comes into being; in one of right action, right livelihood comes into being; in one of right livelihood, right effort comes into being; in one of right effort, right mindfulness comes into being; in one of right mindfulness, right concentration comes into being; in one of right concentration, right knowledge comes into being; in one of right knowledge, right deliverance comes into being.
mn117:34.4 | S: So the trainee has eight factors, while the perfected one has ten factors. | T: Thus, bhikkhus, the path of the disciple in higher training possesses eight factors, the arahant possesses ten factors.
mn117:34.5 | S: And here too, the eradication of many bad, unskillful qualities is fully developed due to right knowledge. | T: (none)
mn117:35.1 | S: In this context, right view comes first. | T: “Therein, bhikkhus, right view comes first.
mn117:35.2 | S: And how does right view come first? | T: And how does right view come first?
mn117:35.3 | S: For one of right view, wrong view is worn away. | T: In one of right view, wrong view is abolished,
mn117:35.4 | S: And the many bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong view are worn away. | T: and the many evil unwholesome states that originate with wrong view as condition are also abolished,
mn117:35.5 | S: And because of right view, many skillful qualities are fully developed. | T: and the many wholesome states that originate with right view as condition come to fulfilment by development.
mn117:35.6 | S: For one of right purpose, wrong purpose is worn away. … | T: “In one of right intention, wrong intention is abolished, and the many evil unwholesome states that originate with wrong intention as condition are also abolished, and the many wholesome states that originate with right intention as condition come to fulfilment by development.
mn117:35.7 | S: For one of right speech, wrong speech is worn away. … | T: “In one of right speech, wrong speech is abolished…
mn117:35.8 | S: For one of right action, wrong action is worn away. … | T: In one of right action, wrong action is abolished…In one of right livelihood,
mn117:35.9 | S: For one of right livelihood, wrong livelihood is worn away. … | T: wrong livelihood is abolished
mn117:35.10 | S: For one of right effort, wrong effort is worn away. … | T: …In one of right effort, wrong effort is abolished…
mn117:35.11 | S: For one of right mindfulness, wrong mindfulness is worn away. … | T: In one of right mindfulness, wrong mindfulness is abolished…In one of right concentration,
mn117:35.12 | S: For one of right immersion, wrong immersion is worn away. … | T: wrong concentration is abolished…In one of right knowledge,
mn117:35.13 | S: For one of right knowledge, wrong knowledge is worn away. … | T: wrong knowledge is abolished…
mn117:35.14 | S: For one of right freedom, wrong freedom is worn away. | T: In one of right deliverance, wrong deliverance is abolished,
mn117:35.15 | S: And the many bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong freedom are worn away. | T: and the many evil unwholesome states that originate with wrong deliverance as condition are also abolished,
mn117:35.16 | S: And because of right freedom, many skillful qualities are fully developed. | T: and the many wholesome states that originate with right deliverance as condition come to fulfilment by development.
mn117:36.1 | S: So there are twenty on the side of the skillful, and twenty on the side of the unskillful. | T: “Thus, bhikkhus, there are twenty factors on the side of the wholesome, and twenty factors on the side of the unwholesome.
mn117:36.2 | S: This exposition of the teaching on the Great Forty has been rolled forth. And it cannot be rolled back by any ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or divinity or by anyone in the world. | T: This Dhamma discourse on the Great Forty has been set rolling and cannot be stopped by any recluse or brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or anyone in the world.
mn117:37.1 | S: If any ascetic or brahmin imagines they can criticize and reject the exposition of the teaching on the Great Forty, they deserve rebuttal and criticism on ten legitimate grounds in this very life. | T: “Bhikkhus, if any recluse or brahmin thinks that this Dhamma discourse on the Great Forty should be censured and rejected, then there are ten legitimate deductions from his assertions that would provide grounds for censuring him here and now.
mn117:37.2 | S: If such a gentleman criticizes right view, they praise and honor the ascetics and brahmins who have wrong view. | T: If that worthy one censures right view, then he would honour and praise those recluses and brahmins who are of wrong view.
mn117:37.3 | S: If they criticize right purpose … | T: If that worthy one censures right intention, then he would honour and praise those recluses and brahmins who are of wrong intention.
mn117:37.4 | S: right speech … | T: If that worthy one censures right speech…
mn117:37.5 | S: right action … | T: right action…
mn117:37.6 | S: right livelihood … | T: right livelihood…
mn117:37.7 | S: right effort … | T: right effort…right mindfulness…
mn117:37.8 | S: right mindfulness … | T: (none)
mn117:37.9 | S: right immersion … | T: right concentration…
mn117:37.10 | S: right knowledge … | T: right knowledge…
mn117:37.11 | S: right freedom, they praise and honor the ascetics and brahmins who have wrong freedom. | T: right deliverance, then he would honour and praise those recluses and brahmins who are of wrong deliverance.
mn117:37.12 | S: If any ascetic or brahmin imagines they can criticize and reject the exposition of the teaching on the Great Forty, they deserve rebuttal and criticism on these ten legitimate grounds in this very life. | T: If any recluse or brahmin thinks that this Dhamma discourse on the Great Forty should be censured and rejected, then these are ten legitimate deductions from his assertions that would provide grounds for censuring him here and now.
mn117:38.1 | S: Even those who were loud and bold advocates of the doctrines of no-cause, inaction, and nihilism, didn’t imagine that the Great Forty should be criticized or rejected. | T: “Bhikkhus, even those teachers from Okkala, Vassa and Bhañña, who held the doctrine of non-causality, the doctrine of non-doing, and the doctrine of nihilism, would not think that this Dhamma discourse on the Great Forty should be censured and rejected.
mn117:38.2 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn117:38.3 | S: For fear of being blamed, provoked, and faulted.” | T: For fear of blame, attack, and confutation.”
mn117:38.4 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: That is what the Blessed One said.
mn117:38.5 | S: Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said. | T: The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
mn117:38.6 | P: Mahācattārīsakasuttaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ sattamaṁ. | T: (none)

## mn9
mn9:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
mn9:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
mn9:1.3 | S: There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: | T: There the venerable Sāriputta addressed the bhikkhus thus:
mn9:1.4 | S: “Reverends, mendicants!” | T: “Friends, bhikkhus.”—
mn9:1.5 | S: “Reverend,” they replied. | T: “Friend,” they replied.
mn9:1.6 | S: Sāriputta said this: | T: The venerable Sāriputta said this:
mn9:2.1 | S: “Reverends, they speak of this thing called ‘right view’. | T: “‘One of right view, one of right view,’ is said, friends.
mn9:2.2 | S: How do you define a noble disciple who has right view, whose view is correct, who has experiential confidence in the teaching, and has come to the true teaching?” | T: In what way is a noble disciple one of right view, whose view is straight, who has unwavering confidence in the Dhamma, and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”
mn9:2.3 | S: “Reverend, we would travel a long way to learn the meaning of this statement in the presence of Venerable Sāriputta. | T: “Indeed, friend, we would come from far away to learn from the venerable Sāriputta the meaning of this statement.
mn9:2.4 | S: May Venerable Sāriputta himself please clarify the meaning of this. | T: It would be good if the venerable Sāriputta would explain the meaning of this statement.
mn9:2.5 | S: The mendicants will listen and remember it.” | T: Having heard it from him, the bhikkhus will remember it.”
mn9:2.6 | S: “Well then, reverends, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.” | T: “Then, friends, listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”
mn9:2.7 | S: “Yes, reverend,” they replied. | T: “Yes, friend,” the bhikkhus replied.
mn9:2.8 | S: Sāriputta said this: | T: The venerable Sāriputta said this:
mn9:3.1 | S: “A noble disciple understands the unskillful and its root, and the skillful and its root. | T: The Wholesome and the Unwholesome “When, friends, a noble disciple understands the unwholesome and the root of the unwholesome, the wholesome and the root of the wholesome,
mn9:3.2 | S: When they’ve done this, they’re defined as a noble disciple who has right view, whose view is correct, who has experiential confidence in the teaching, and has come to the true teaching. | T: in that way he is one of right view, whose view is straight, who has unwavering confidence in the Dhamma and has arrived at this true Dhamma.
mn9:4.1 | S: But what is the unskillful and what is its root? And what is the skillful and what is its root? | T: “And what, friends, is the unwholesome, what is the root of the unwholesome, what is the wholesome, what is the root of the wholesome?
mn9:4.2 | S: Killing living creatures, stealing, and sexual misconduct; speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical; covetousness, ill will, and wrong view. | T: Killing living beings is unwholesome; taking what is not given is unwholesome; misconduct in sensual pleasures is unwholesome; false speech is unwholesome; malicious speech is unwholesome; harsh speech is unwholesome; gossip is unwholesome; covetousness is unwholesome; ill will is unwholesome; wrong view is unwholesome.
mn9:4.3 | S: This is called the unskillful. | T: This is called the unwholesome.
mn9:5.1 | S: And what is the root of the unskillful? | T: “And what is the root of the unwholesome?
mn9:5.2 | S: Greed, hate, and delusion. | T: Greed is a root of the unwholesome; hate is a root of the unwholesome; delusion is a root of the unwholesome.
mn9:5.3 | S: This is called the root of the unskillful. | T: This is called the root of the unwholesome.
mn9:6.1 | S: And what is the skillful? | T: “And what is the wholesome?
mn9:6.2 | S: Refraining from killing living creatures, stealing, and sexual misconduct; refraining from speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical; contentment, good will, and right view. | T: Abstention from killing living beings is wholesome; abstention from taking what is not given is wholesome; abstention from misconduct in sensual pleasures is wholesome; abstention from false speech is wholesome; abstention from malicious speech is wholesome; abstention from harsh speech is wholesome; abstention from gossip is wholesome; uncovetousness is wholesome; non-ill will is wholesome; right view is wholesome.
mn9:6.3 | S: This is called the skillful. | T: This is called the wholesome.
mn9:7.1 | S: And what is the root of the skillful? | T: “And what is the root of the wholesome?
mn9:7.2 | S: Contentment, love, and understanding. | T: Non-greed is a root of the wholesome; non-hate is a root of the wholesome; non-delusion is a root of the wholesome.
mn9:7.3 | S: This is called the root of the skillful. | T: This is called the root of the wholesome.
mn9:8.1 | S: A noble disciple understands in this way the unskillful and its root, and the skillful and its root. They’ve completely given up the underlying tendency to greed, dispelled the underlying tendency to aversion, and eradicated the underlying tendency to the view and conceit ‘I am’. They’ve given up ignorance and given rise to knowledge, and make an end of suffering in this very life. | T: “When a noble disciple has thus understood the unwholesome and the root of the unwholesome, the wholesome and the root of the wholesome, he entirely abandons the underlying tendency to lust, he abolishes the underlying tendency to aversion, he extirpates the underlying tendency to the view and conceit ‘I am,’ and by abandoning ignorance and arousing true knowledge he here and now makes an end of suffering.
mn9:8.2 | S: When they’ve done this, they’re defined as a noble disciple who has right view, whose view is correct, who has experiential confidence in the teaching, and has come to the true teaching.” | T: In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view, whose view is straight, who has unwavering confidence in the Dhamma, and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
mn9:9.1 | S: Saying “Good, reverend,” those mendicants approved and agreed with what Sāriputta said. Then they asked another question: | T: Nutriment Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words. Then they asked him a further question:
mn9:9.2 | S: “But reverend, might there be another way to describe a noble disciple who has right view, whose view is correct, who has experiential confidence in the teaching, and has come to the true teaching?” | T: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—
mn9:10.1 | S: “There might, reverends. | T: “There might be, friends.
mn9:10.2 | S: A noble disciple understands fuel, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. | T: “When, friends, a noble disciple understands nutriment, the origin of nutriment, the cessation of nutriment, and the way leading to the cessation of nutriment,
mn9:10.3 | S: When they’ve done this, they’re defined as a noble disciple who has right view, whose view is correct, who has experiential confidence in the teaching, and has come to the true teaching. | T: in that way he is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.
mn9:11.1 | S: But what is fuel? What is its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation? | T: “And what is nutriment, what is the origin of nutriment, what is the cessation of nutriment, what is the way leading to the cessation of nutriment?
mn9:11.2 | S: These four fuels maintain sentient beings that have been born and help those about to be born. | T: There are four kinds of nutriment for the maintenance of beings that already have come to be and for the support of those about to come to be.
mn9:11.3 | S: What four? | T: What four?
mn9:11.4 | S: Edible food, whether solid or subtle; contact is the second, mental intention the third, and consciousness the fourth. | T: They are: physical food as nutriment, gross or subtle; contact as the second; mental volition as the third; and consciousness as the fourth.
mn9:11.5 | S: Fuel originates from craving. Fuel ceases when craving ceases. The practice that leads to the cessation of fuel is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: | T: With the arising of craving there is the arising of nutriment. With the cessation of craving there is the cessation of nutriment. The way leading to the cessation of nutriment is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is,
mn9:11.6 | S: right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. | T: right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
mn9:12.1 | S: A noble disciple understands in this way fuel, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. They’ve completely given up the underlying tendency to greed, dispelled the underlying tendency to aversion, and eradicated the underlying tendency to the view and conceit ‘I am’. They’ve given up ignorance and given rise to knowledge, and make an end of suffering in this very life. | T: “When a noble disciple has thus understood nutriment, the origin of nutriment, the cessation of nutriment, and the way leading to the cessation of nutriment, he entirely abandons the underlying tendency to greed, he abolishes the underlying tendency to aversion, he extirpates the underlying tendency to the view and conceit ‘I am,’ and by abandoning ignorance and arousing true knowledge he here and now makes an end of suffering.
mn9:12.2 | S: When they’ve done this, they’re defined as a noble disciple who has right view, whose view is correct, who has experiential confidence in the teaching, and has come to the true teaching.” | T: In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view, whose view is straight, who has unwavering confidence in the Dhamma, and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
mn9:13.1 | S: Saying “Good, reverend,” those mendicants … asked another question: | T: The Four Noble Truths Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words. Then they asked him a further question:
mn9:13.2 | S: “But reverend, might there be another way to describe a noble disciple who … has come to the true teaching?” | T: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—
mn9:14.1 | S: “There might, reverends. | T: “There might be, friends.
mn9:14.2 | S: A noble disciple understands suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. | T: “When, friends, a noble disciple understands suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the way leading to the cessation of suffering,
mn9:14.3 | S: When they’ve done this, they’re defined as a noble disciple who … has come to the true teaching. | T: in that way he is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.
mn9:15.1 | S: But what is suffering? What is its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation? | T: “And what is suffering, what is the origin of suffering, what is the cessation of suffering, what is the way leading to the cessation of suffering?
mn9:15.2 | S: Rebirth is suffering; old age is suffering; death is suffering; sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are suffering; being coupled with the disliked is suffering; separation from the liked is suffering; not getting what you wish for is suffering. In brief, the five grasping aggregates are suffering. | T: Birth is suffering; ageing is suffering; sickness is suffering; death is suffering; sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair are suffering; not to obtain what one wants is suffering; in short, the five aggregates affected by clinging are suffering.
mn9:15.3 | S: This is called suffering. | T: This is called suffering.
mn9:16.1 | S: And what is the origin of suffering? | T: “And what is the origin of suffering?
mn9:16.2 | S: It’s the craving that leads to future lives, mixed up with relishing and greed, taking pleasure there wherever it alights. That is, | T: It is craving, which brings renewal of being, is accompanied by delight and lust, and delights in this and that; that is,
mn9:16.3 | S: craving for sensual pleasures, craving for continued existence, and craving for nonexistence. | T: craving for sensual pleasures , craving for being, and craving for non-being.
mn9:16.4 | S: This is called the origin of suffering. | T: This is called the origin of suffering.
mn9:17.1 | S: And what is the cessation of suffering? | T: “And what is the cessation of suffering?
mn9:17.2 | S: It’s the fading away and cessation of that very same craving with no residue left behind; giving it away, letting it go, releasing it, and not clinging to it. | T: It is the remainderless fading away and ceasing, the giving up, relinquishing, letting go, and rejecting of that same craving.
mn9:17.3 | S: This is called the cessation of suffering. | T: This is called the cessation of suffering.
mn9:18.1 | S: And what is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering? | T: “And what is the way leading to the cessation of suffering?
mn9:18.2 | S: It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: | T: It is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is,
mn9:18.3 | S: right view … right immersion. | T: right view…right concentration.
mn9:18.4 | S: This is called the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. | T: This is called the way leading to the cessation of suffering.
mn9:19.1 | S: A noble disciple understands in this way suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. They’ve completely given up the underlying tendency to greed, dispelled the underlying tendency to aversion, and eradicated the underlying tendency to the view and conceit ‘I am’. They’ve given up ignorance and given rise to knowledge, and make an end of suffering in this very life. | T: “When a noble disciple has thus understood suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the way leading to the cessation of suffering…he here and now makes an end of suffering.
mn9:19.2 | S: When they’ve done this, they’re defined as a noble disciple who has right view, whose view is correct, who has experiential confidence in the teaching, and has come to the true teaching.” | T: In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
mn9:20.1 | S: Saying “Good, reverend,” those mendicants … asked another question: | T: Ageing and Death Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words. Then they asked him a further question:
mn9:20.2 | S: “But reverend, might there be another way to describe a noble disciple who … has come to the true teaching?” | T: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—
mn9:21.1 | S: “There might, reverends. | T: “There might be, friends.
mn9:21.2 | S: A noble disciple understands old age and death, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation … | T: “When, friends, a noble disciple understands ageing and death, the origin of ageing and death, the cessation of ageing and death, and the way leading to the cessation of ageing and death,
mn9:21.3 | P: ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako sammādiṭṭhi hoti, ujugatāssa diṭṭhi, dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato, āgato imaṁ saddhammaṁ. | T: in that way he is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.
mn9:22.1 | S: But what are old age and death? What is their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation? | T: “And what is ageing and death, what is the origin of ageing and death, what is the cessation of ageing and death, what is the way leading to the cessation of ageing and death?
mn9:22.2 | S: The old age, decrepitude, broken teeth, gray hair, wrinkly skin, diminished vitality, and failing faculties of the various sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings. | T: The ageing of beings in the various orders of beings, their old age, brokenness of teeth, greyness of hair, wrinkling of skin, decline of life, weakness of faculties—
mn9:22.3 | S: This is called old age. | T: this is called ageing.
mn9:22.4 | S: And what is death? | T: (none)
mn9:22.5 | S: The passing away, perishing, disintegration, demise, mortality, death, decease, breaking up of the aggregates, laying to rest of the corpse, and cutting off of the life faculty of the various sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings. | T: The passing of beings out of the various orders of beings, their passing away, dissolution, disappearance, dying, completion of time, dissolution of the aggregates, laying down of the body—
mn9:22.6 | S: This is called death. | T: this is called death.
mn9:22.7 | S: Such is old age, and such is death. | T: So this ageing and this death are what is called ageing and death.
mn9:22.8 | S: This is called old age and death. | T: (none)
mn9:22.9 | S: Old age and death originate from rebirth. Old age and death cease when rebirth ceases. The practice that leads to the cessation of old age and death is simply this noble eightfold path …” | T: With the arising of birth there is the arising of ageing and death. With the cessation of birth there is the cessation of ageing and death. The way leading to the cessation of ageing and death is just this Noble Eightfold Path;
mn9:22.10 | P: sammādiṭṭhi …pe… sammāsamādhi. | T: that is, right view…right concentration.
mn9:23.1 | P: Yato kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako evaṁ jarāmaraṇaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ jarāmaraṇasamudayaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ jarāmaraṇanirodhaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ jarāmaraṇanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadaṁ pajānāti, so sabbaso rāgānusayaṁ pahāya …pe… dukkhassantakaro hoti— | T: “When a noble disciple has thus understood ageing and death, the origin of ageing and death, the cessation of ageing and death, and the way leading to the cessation of ageing and death…he here and now makes an end of suffering.
mn9:23.2 | P: ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako sammādiṭṭhi hoti, ujugatāssa diṭṭhi, dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato, āgato imaṁ saddhamman”ti. | T: In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
mn9:24.1 | P: “Sādhāvuso”ti kho …pe… apucchuṁ— | T: Birth Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words. Then they asked him a further question:
mn9:24.2 | S: “Might there be another way to describe a noble disciple?” | T: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—
mn9:25.1 | S: “There might, reverends. | T: “There might be, friends.
mn9:25.2 | S: A noble disciple understands rebirth, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation … | T: “When, friends, a noble disciple understands birth, the origin of birth, the cessation of birth, and the way leading to the cessation of birth,
mn9:25.3 | P: ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako sammādiṭṭhi hoti, ujugatāssa diṭṭhi, dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato, āgato imaṁ saddhammaṁ. | T: in that way he is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.
mn9:26.1 | S: But what is rebirth? What is its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation? | T: “And what is birth, what is the origin of birth, what is the cessation of birth, what is the way leading to the cessation of birth?
mn9:26.2 | S: The rebirth, inception, conception, regeneration, manifestation of the aggregates, and acquisition of the sense fields of the various sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings. | T: The birth of beings in the various orders of beings, their coming to birth, precipitation in a womb, generation, manifestation of the aggregates, obtaining the bases for contact—
mn9:26.3 | S: This is called rebirth. | T: this is called birth.
mn9:26.4 | S: Rebirth originates from continued existence. Rebirth ceases when continued existence ceases. The practice that leads to the cessation of rebirth is simply this noble eightfold path …” | T: With the arising of being there is the arising of birth. With the cessation of being there is the cessation of birth. The way leading to the cessation of birth is just this Noble Eightfold Path;
mn9:26.5 | P: sammādiṭṭhi …pe… sammāsamādhi. | T: that is, right view…right concentration.
mn9:27.1 | P: Yato kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako evaṁ jātiṁ pajānāti, evaṁ jātisamudayaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ jātinirodhaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ jātinirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadaṁ pajānāti, so sabbaso rāgānusayaṁ pahāya …pe… dukkhassantakaro hoti— | T: “When a noble disciple has thus understood birth, the origin of birth, the cessation of birth, and the way leading to the cessation of birth…he here and now makes an end of suffering.
mn9:27.2 | P: ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako sammādiṭṭhi hoti, ujugatāssa diṭṭhi, dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato, āgato imaṁ saddhamman”ti. | T: In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
mn9:28.1 | P: “Sādhāvuso”ti kho …pe… apucchuṁ— | T: Being Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words. Then they asked him a further question:
mn9:28.2 | S: “Might there be another way to describe a noble disciple?” | T: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—
mn9:29.1 | S: “There might, reverends. | T: “There might be, friends.
mn9:29.2 | S: A noble disciple understands continued existence, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. | T: “When, friends, a noble disciple understands being, the origin of being, the cessation of being, and the way leading to the cessation of being,
mn9:29.3 | P: ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako sammādiṭṭhi hoti, ujugatāssa diṭṭhi, dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato, āgato imaṁ saddhammaṁ. | T: in that way he is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.
mn9:30.1 | S: But what is continued existence? What is its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation? | T: “And what is being, what is the origin of being, what is the cessation of being, what is the way leading to the cessation of being?
mn9:30.2 | S: There are these three states of continued existence. | T: There are these three kinds of being:
mn9:30.3 | S: Existence in the sensual realm, the realm of luminous form, and the formless realm. | T: sense-sphere being, fine-material being, and immaterial being.
mn9:30.4 | S: Continued existence originates from grasping. Continued existence ceases when grasping ceases. The practice that leads to the cessation of continued existence is simply this noble eightfold path …” | T: With the arising of clinging there is the arising of being. With the cessation of clinging there is the cessation of being. The way leading to the cessation of being is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is,
mn9:30.5 | P: sammādiṭṭhi …pe… sammāsamādhi. | T: right view…right concentration.
mn9:31.1 | P: Yato kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako evaṁ bhavaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ bhavasamudayaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ bhavanirodhaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ bhavanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadaṁ pajānāti, so sabbaso rāgānusayaṁ pahāya …pe… dukkhassantakaro hoti. | T: “When a noble disciple has thus understood being, the origin of being, the cessation of being, and the way leading to the cessation of being…he here and now makes an end of suffering.
mn9:31.2 | P: Ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako sammādiṭṭhi hoti, ujugatāssa diṭṭhi, dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato, āgato imaṁ saddhamman”ti. | T: In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
mn9:32.1 | P: “Sādhāvuso”ti kho …pe… apucchuṁ— | T: Clinging Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words. Then they asked him a further question:
mn9:32.2 | S: “Might there be another way to describe a noble disciple?” | T: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—
mn9:33.1 | S: “There might, reverends. | T: “There might be, friends.
mn9:33.2 | S: A noble disciple understands grasping, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation … | T: “When, friends, a noble disciple understands clinging, the origin of clinging, the cessation of clinging, and the way leading to the cessation of clinging,
mn9:33.3 | P: ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako sammādiṭṭhi hoti, ujugatāssa diṭṭhi, dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato, āgato imaṁ saddhammaṁ. | T: in that way he is one of right view… and has arrived at this true Dhamma.
mn9:34.1 | S: But what is grasping? What is its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation? | T: “And what is clinging, what is the origin of clinging, what is the cessation of clinging, what is the way leading to the cessation of clinging?
mn9:34.2 | S: There are these four kinds of grasping. | T: There are these four kinds of clinging:
mn9:34.3 | S: Grasping at sensual pleasures, views, precepts and observances, and theories of a self. | T: clinging to sensual pleasures, clinging to views, clinging to rules and observances, and clinging to a doctrine of self.
mn9:34.4 | S: Grasping originates from craving. Grasping ceases when craving ceases. The practice that leads to the cessation of grasping is simply this noble eightfold path …” | T: With the arising of craving there is the arising of clinging. With the cessation of craving there is the cessation of clinging. The way leading to the cessation of clinging is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is,
mn9:34.5 | P: sammādiṭṭhi …pe… sammāsamādhi. | T: right view…right concentration.
mn9:35.1 | P: Yato kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako evaṁ upādānaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ upādānasamudayaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ upādānanirodhaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ upādānanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadaṁ pajānāti, so sabbaso rāgānusayaṁ pahāya …pe… dukkhassantakaro hoti— | T: “When a noble disciple has thus understood clinging, the origin of clinging, the cessation of clinging, and the way leading to the cessation of clinging…he here and now makes an end of suffering.
mn9:35.2 | P: ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako sammādiṭṭhi hoti, ujugatāssa diṭṭhi, dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato, āgato imaṁ saddhamman”ti. | T: In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view… and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
mn9:36.1 | P: “Sādhāvuso”ti kho …pe… apucchuṁ— | T: Craving Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words. Then they asked him a further question:
mn9:36.2 | S: “Might there be another way to describe a noble disciple?” | T: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—
mn9:37.1 | S: “There might, reverends. | T: “There might be, friends.
mn9:37.2 | S: A noble disciple understands craving, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation … | T: “When, friends, a noble disciple understands craving, the origin of craving, the cessation of craving, and the way leading to the cessation of craving,
mn9:37.3 | P: ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako sammādiṭṭhi hoti, ujugatāssa diṭṭhi, dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato, āgato imaṁ saddhammaṁ. | T: in that way he is one of right view… and has arrived at this true Dhamma.
mn9:38.1 | S: But what is craving? What is its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation? | T: “And what is craving, what is the origin of craving, what is the cessation of craving, what is the way leading to the cessation of craving?
mn9:38.2 | S: There are these six classes of craving. | T: There are these six classes of craving:
mn9:38.3 | S: Craving for sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. | T: craving for forms, craving for sounds, craving for odours, craving for flavours, craving for tangibles, craving for mind-objects.
mn9:38.4 | S: Craving originates from feeling. Craving ceases when feeling ceases. The practice that leads to the cessation of craving is simply this noble eightfold path …” | T: With the arising of feeling there is the arising of craving. With the cessation of feeling there is the cessation of craving. The way leading to the cessation of craving is just this Noble Eightfold Path;
mn9:38.5 | P: sammādiṭṭhi …pe… sammāsamādhi. | T: that is, right view…right concentration.
mn9:39.1 | P: Yato kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako evaṁ taṇhaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ taṇhāsamudayaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ taṇhānirodhaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ taṇhānirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadaṁ pajānāti, so sabbaso rāgānusayaṁ pahāya …pe… dukkhassantakaro hoti— | T: “When a noble disciple has thus understood craving, the origin of craving, the cessation of craving, and the way leading to the cessation of craving…he here and now makes an end of suffering.
mn9:39.2 | P: ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako sammādiṭṭhi hoti, ujugatāssa diṭṭhi, dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato, āgato imaṁ saddhamman”ti. | T: In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view… and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
mn9:40.1 | P: “Sādhāvuso”ti kho …pe… apucchuṁ— | T: Feeling Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words. Then they asked him a further question:
mn9:40.2 | S: “Might there be another way to describe a noble disciple?” | T: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—
mn9:41.1 | S: “There might, reverends. | T: “There might be, friends.
mn9:41.2 | S: A noble disciple understands feeling, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation … | T: “When, friends, a noble disciple understands feeling, the origin of feeling, the cessation of feeling, and the way leading to the cessation of feeling,
mn9:41.3 | P: ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako sammādiṭṭhi hoti, ujugatāssa diṭṭhi, dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato, āgato imaṁ saddhammaṁ. | T: in that way he is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.
mn9:42.1 | S: But what is feeling? What is its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation? | T: “And what is feeling, what is the origin of feeling, what is the cessation of feeling, what is the way leading to the cessation of feeling?
mn9:42.2 | S: There are these six classes of feeling. | T: There are these six classes of feeling:
mn9:42.3 | S: Feeling born of contact through the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. | T: feeling born of eye-contact, feeling born of ear-contact, feeling born of nose-contact, feeling born of tongue-contact, feeling born of body-contact, feeling born of mind-contact.
mn9:42.4 | S: Feeling originates from contact. Feeling ceases when contact ceases. The practice that leads to the cessation of feeling is simply this noble eightfold path …” | T: With the arising of contact there is the arising of feeling. With the cessation of contact there is the cessation of feeling. The way leading to the cessation of feeling is just this Noble Eightfold Path;
mn9:42.5 | P: sammādiṭṭhi …pe… sammāsamādhi. | T: that is, right view… right concentration.
mn9:43.1 | P: Yato kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako evaṁ vedanaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ vedanāsamudayaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ vedanānirodhaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ vedanānirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadaṁ pajānāti, so sabbaso rāgānusayaṁ pahāya …pe… dukkhassantakaro hoti— | T: “When a noble disciple has thus understood feeling, the origin of feeling, the cessation of feeling, and the way leading to the cessation of feeling…he here and now makes an end of suffering.
mn9:43.2 | P: ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako sammādiṭṭhi hoti, ujugatāssa diṭṭhi, dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato, āgato imaṁ saddhamman”ti. | T: In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
mn9:44.1 | P: “Sādhāvuso”ti kho …pe… apucchuṁ— | T: Contact Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words. Then they asked him a further question:
mn9:44.2 | S: “Might there be another way to describe a noble disciple?” | T: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—
mn9:45.1 | S: “There might, reverends. | T: “There might be, friends.
mn9:45.2 | S: A noble disciple understands contact, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation … | T: “When, friends, a noble disciple understands contact, the origin of contact, the cessation of contact, and the way leading to the cessation of contact,
mn9:45.3 | P: ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako sammādiṭṭhi hoti, ujugatāssa diṭṭhi, dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato, āgato imaṁ saddhammaṁ. | T: in that way he is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.
mn9:46.1 | S: But what is contact? What is its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation? | T: “And what is contact, what is the origin of contact, what is the cessation of contact, what is the way leading to the cessation of contact?
mn9:46.2 | S: There are these six classes of contact. | T: There are these six classes of contact:
mn9:46.3 | S: Contact through the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. | T: eye-contact, ear-contact, nose-contact, tongue-contact, body-contact, mind-contact.
mn9:46.4 | S: Contact originates from the six sense fields. Contact ceases when the six sense fields cease. The practice that leads to the cessation of contact is simply this noble eightfold path …” | T: With the arising of the sixfold base there is the arising of contact. With the cessation of the sixfold base there is the cessation of contact. The way leading to the cessation of contact is just this Noble Eightfold Path;
mn9:46.5 | P: sammādiṭṭhi …pe… sammāsamādhi. | T: that is, right view…right concentration.
mn9:47.1 | P: Yato kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako evaṁ phassaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ phassasamudayaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ phassanirodhaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ phassanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadaṁ pajānāti, so sabbaso rāgānusayaṁ pahāya …pe… dukkhassantakaro hoti— | T: “When a noble disciple has thus understood contact, the origin of contact, the cessation of contact, and the way leading to the cessation of contact…he here and now makes an end of suffering.
mn9:47.2 | P: ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako sammādiṭṭhi hoti, ujugatāssa diṭṭhi, dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato, āgato imaṁ saddhamman”ti. | T: In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
mn9:48.1 | P: “Sādhāvuso”ti kho …pe… apucchuṁ— | T: The Sixfold Base Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words. Then they asked him a further question:
mn9:48.2 | S: “Might there be another way to describe a noble disciple?” | T: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—
mn9:49.1 | S: “There might, reverends. | T: “There might be, friends.
mn9:49.2 | S: A noble disciple understands the six sense fields, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation … | T: “When, friends, a noble disciple understands the sixfold base, the origin of the sixfold base, the cessation of the sixfold base, and the way leading to the cessation of the sixfold base,
mn9:49.3 | P: ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako sammādiṭṭhi hoti, ujugatāssa diṭṭhi, dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato, āgato imaṁ saddhammaṁ. | T: in that way he is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.
mn9:50.1 | S: But what are the six sense fields? What is their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation? | T: “And what is the sixfold base, what is the origin of the sixfold base, what is the cessation of the sixfold base, what is the way leading to the cessation of the sixfold base?
mn9:50.2 | S: There are these six sense fields. | T: There are these six bases:
mn9:50.3 | S: The sense fields of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. | T: the eye-base, the ear-base, the nose-base, the tongue-base, the body-base, the mind-base.
mn9:50.4 | S: The six sense fields originate from name and form. The six sense fields cease when name and form cease. The practice that leads to the cessation of the six sense fields is simply this noble eightfold path …” | T: With the arising of mentality-materiality there is the arising of the sixfold base. With the cessation of mentality-materiality there is the cessation of the sixfold base. The way leading to the cessation of the sixfold base is just this Noble Eightfold Path;
mn9:50.5 | P: sammādiṭṭhi …pe… sammāsamādhi. | T: that is, right view…right concentration.
mn9:51.1 | P: Yato kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako evaṁ saḷāyatanaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ saḷāyatanasamudayaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ saḷāyatananirodhaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ saḷāyatananirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadaṁ pajānāti, so sabbaso rāgānusayaṁ pahāya …pe… dukkhassantakaro hoti— | T: “When a noble disciple has thus understood the sixfold base, the origin of the sixfold base, the cessation of the sixfold base, and the way leading to the cessation of the sixfold base…he here and now makes an end of suffering.
mn9:51.2 | P: ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako sammādiṭṭhi hoti, ujugatāssa diṭṭhi, dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato, āgato imaṁ saddhamman”ti. | T: In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
mn9:52.1 | P: “Sādhāvuso”ti kho …pe… apucchuṁ— | T: Mentality-Materiality Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words. Then they asked him a further question:
mn9:52.2 | S: “Might there be another way to describe a noble disciple?” | T: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—
mn9:53.1 | S: “There might, reverends. | T: “There might be, friends.
mn9:53.2 | S: A noble disciple understands name and form, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation … | T: “When, friends, a noble disciple understands mentality-materiality, the origin of mentality-materiality, the cessation of mentality-materiality, and the way leading to the cessation of mentality-materiality,
mn9:53.3 | P: ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako sammādiṭṭhi hoti, ujugatāssa diṭṭhi, dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato, āgato imaṁ saddhammaṁ. | T: in that way he is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.
mn9:54.1 | S: But what are name and form? What is their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation? | T: “And what is mentality-materiality, what is the origin of mentality-materiality, what is the cessation of mentality-materiality, what is the way leading to the cessation of mentality-materiality?
mn9:54.2 | S: Feeling, perception, intention, contact, and application of mind— | T: Feeling, perception, volition, contact, and attention—
mn9:54.3 | S: this is called name. | T: these are called mentality.
mn9:54.4 | S: The four principal states, and form derived from the four principal states— | T: The four great elements and the material form derived from the four great elements—
mn9:54.5 | S: this is called form. | T: these are called materiality.
mn9:54.6 | S: Such is name and such is form. | T: So this mentality and this materiality are what is called mentality-materiality.
mn9:54.7 | S: This is called name and form. | T: (none)
mn9:54.8 | S: Name and form originate from consciousness. Name and form cease when consciousness ceases. The practice that leads to the cessation of name and form is simply this noble eightfold path …” | T: With the arising of consciousness there is the arising of mentality-materiality. With the cessation of consciousness there is the cessation of mentality-materiality. The way leading to the cessation of mentality-materiality is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is,
mn9:54.9 | P: sammādiṭṭhi …pe… sammāsamādhi. | T: right view…right concentration.
mn9:55.1 | P: Yato kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako evaṁ nāmarūpaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ nāmarūpasamudayaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ nāmarūpanirodhaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ nāmarūpanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadaṁ pajānāti, so sabbaso rāgānusayaṁ pahāya …pe… dukkhassantakaro hoti— | T: “When a noble disciple has thus understood mentality-materiality, the origin of mentality-materiality, the cessation of mentality-materiality, and the way leading to the cessation of mentality-materiality…he here and now makes an end of suffering.
mn9:55.2 | P: ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako sammādiṭṭhi hoti, ujugatāssa diṭṭhi, dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato, āgato imaṁ saddhamman”ti. | T: In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
mn9:56.1 | P: “Sādhāvuso”ti kho …pe… apucchuṁ— | T: Consciousness Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words. Then they asked him a further question:
mn9:56.2 | S: “Might there be another way to describe a noble disciple?” | T: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—
mn9:57.1 | S: “There might, reverends. | T: “There might be, friends.
mn9:57.2 | S: A noble disciple understands consciousness, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation … | T: “When, friends, a noble disciple understands consciousness, the origin of consciousness, the cessation of consciousness, and the way leading to the cessation of consciousness,
mn9:57.3 | P: ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako sammādiṭṭhi hoti, ujugatāssa diṭṭhi, dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato, āgato imaṁ saddhammaṁ. | T: in that way he is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.
mn9:58.1 | S: But what is consciousness? What is its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation? | T: “And what is consciousness, what is the origin of consciousness, what is the cessation of consciousness, what is the way leading to the cessation of consciousness?
mn9:58.2 | S: There are these six classes of consciousness. | T: There are these six classes of consciousness:
mn9:58.3 | S: Eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind consciousness. | T: eye-consciousness, ear-consciousness, nose-consciousness, tongue-consciousness, body-consciousness, mind-consciousness.
mn9:58.4 | S: Consciousness originates from choices. Consciousness ceases when choices cease. The practice that leads to the cessation of consciousness is simply this noble eightfold path …” | T: With the arising of formations there is the arising of consciousness. With the cessation of formations there is the cessation of consciousness. The way leading to the cessation of consciousness is just this Noble Eightfold Path;
mn9:58.5 | P: sammādiṭṭhi …pe… sammāsamādhi. | T: that is, right view…right concentration.
mn9:59.1 | P: Yato kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako evaṁ viññāṇaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ viññāṇasamudayaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ viññāṇanirodhaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ viññāṇanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadaṁ pajānāti, so sabbaso rāgānusayaṁ pahāya …pe… dukkhassantakaro hoti— | T: “When a noble disciple has thus understood consciousness, the origin of consciousness, the cessation of consciousness, and the way leading to the cessation of consciousness …he here and now makes an end of suffering.
mn9:59.2 | P: ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako sammādiṭṭhi hoti, ujugatāssa diṭṭhi, dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato, āgato imaṁ saddhamman”ti. | T: In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
mn9:60.1 | P: “Sādhāvuso”ti kho …pe… apucchuṁ— | T: Formations Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words. Then they asked him a further question:
mn9:60.2 | S: “Might there be another way to describe a noble disciple?” | T: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—
mn9:61.1 | S: “There might, reverends. | T: “There might be, friends.
mn9:61.2 | S: A noble disciple understands choices, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation … | T: “When, friends, a noble disciple understands formations, the origin of formations, the cessation of formations, and the way leading to the cessation of formations,
mn9:61.3 | P: ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako sammādiṭṭhi hoti, ujugatāssa diṭṭhi, dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato, āgato imaṁ saddhammaṁ. | T: in that way he is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.
mn9:62.1 | S: But what are choices? What is their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation? | T: “And what are formations, what is the origin of formations, what is the cessation of formations, what is the way leading to the cessation of formations?
mn9:62.2 | S: There are these three kinds of choice. | T: There are these three kinds of formations:
mn9:62.3 | S: Choices by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: the bodily formation, the verbal formation, the mental formation.
mn9:62.4 | S: Choices originate from ignorance. Choices cease when ignorance ceases. The practice that leads to the cessation of choices is simply this noble eightfold path …” | T: With the arising of ignorance there is the arising of formations. With the cessation of ignorance there is the cessation of formations. The way leading to the cessation of formations is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is,
mn9:62.5 | P: sammādiṭṭhi …pe… sammāsamādhi. | T: right view…right concentration.
mn9:63.1 | P: Yato kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako evaṁ saṅkhāre pajānāti, evaṁ saṅkhārasamudayaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ saṅkhāranirodhaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ saṅkhāranirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadaṁ pajānāti, so sabbaso rāgānusayaṁ pahāya, paṭighānusayaṁ paṭivinodetvā, ‘asmī’ti diṭṭhimānānusayaṁ samūhanitvā, avijjaṁ pahāya vijjaṁ uppādetvā, diṭṭheva dhamme dukkhassantakaro hoti— | T: “When a noble disciple has thus understood formations, the origin of formations, the cessation of formations, and the way leading to the cessation of formations…he here and now makes an end of suffering.
mn9:63.2 | P: ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako sammādiṭṭhi hoti, ujugatāssa diṭṭhi, dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato, āgato imaṁ saddhamman”ti. | T: In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
mn9:64.1 | P: “Sādhāvuso”ti kho …pe… apucchuṁ— | T: Ignorance Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words. Then they asked him a further question:
mn9:64.2 | S: “Might there be another way to describe a noble disciple?” | T: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—
mn9:64.3 | S: “There might, reverends. | T: “There might be, friends.
mn9:65.1 | S: A noble disciple understands ignorance, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation … | T: “When, friends, a noble disciple understands ignorance, the origin of ignorance, the cessation of ignorance, and the way leading to the cessation of ignorance,
mn9:65.2 | P: ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako sammādiṭṭhi hoti, ujugatāssa diṭṭhi, dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato, āgato imaṁ saddhammaṁ. | T: in that way he is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.
mn9:65.3 | S: But what is ignorance? What is its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation? | T: “And what is ignorance, what is the origin of ignorance, what is the cessation of ignorance, what is the way leading to the cessation of ignorance?
mn9:65.4 | S: Not knowing about suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. | T: Not knowing about suffering, not knowing about the origin of suffering, not knowing about the cessation of suffering, not knowing about the way leading to the cessation of suffering—
mn9:65.5 | S: This is called ignorance. | T: this is called ignorance.
mn9:66.1 | S: Ignorance originates from defilement. Ignorance ceases when defilement ceases. The practice that leads to the cessation of ignorance is simply this noble eightfold path …” | T: With the arising of the taints there is the arising of ignorance. With the cessation of the taints there is the cessation of ignorance. The way leading to the cessation of ignorance is just this Noble Eightfold Path;
mn9:66.2 | P: sammādiṭṭhi …pe… sammāsamādhi. | T: that is, right view…right concentration.
mn9:67.1 | P: Yato kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako evaṁ avijjaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ avijjāsamudayaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ avijjānirodhaṁ pajānāti, evaṁ avijjānirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadaṁ pajānāti, so sabbaso rāgānusayaṁ pahāya, paṭighānusayaṁ paṭivinodetvā, ‘asmī’ti diṭṭhimānānusayaṁ samūhanitvā, avijjaṁ pahāya vijjaṁ uppādetvā, diṭṭheva dhamme dukkhassantakaro hoti— | T: “When a noble disciple has thus understood ignorance, the origin of ignorance, the cessation of ignorance, and the way leading to the cessation of ignorance…he here and now makes an end of suffering.
