## mn118, continued
mn118:20.2 | S: They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in gladdening the mind.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out gladdening the mind.’ | T: He trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in gladdening the mind’; he trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out gladdening the mind.’
mn118:20.3 | S: They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in immersing the mind in samādhi.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out immersing the mind in samādhi.’ | T: He trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in concentrating the mind’; he trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out concentrating the mind.’
mn118:20.4 | S: They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in freeing the mind.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out freeing the mind.’ | T: He trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in liberating the mind’; he trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out liberating the mind.’
mn118:21.1 | S: They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing impermanence.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing impermanence.’ | T: “He trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in contemplating impermanence’; he trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out contemplating impermanence. ’
mn118:21.2 | S: They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing fading away.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing fading away.’ | T: He trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in contemplating fading away’; he trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out contemplating fading away.’
mn118:21.3 | S: They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing cessation.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing cessation.’ | T: He trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in contemplating cessation’; he trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out contemplating cessation.’
mn118:21.4 | S: They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing letting go.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing letting go.’ | T: He trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in contemplating relinquishment’; he trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out contemplating relinquishment. ’
mn118:22.1 | S: Mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated in this way, is very fruitful and beneficial. | T: “Bhikkhus, that is how mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated, so that it is of great fruit and great benefit.
mn118:23.1 | S: And how is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated so as to fulfill the four kinds of mindfulness meditation? | T: Fulfilment of the Four Foundations of Mindfulness “And how, bhikkhus, does mindfulness of breathing, developed and cultivated, fulfil the four foundations of mindfulness?
mn118:24.1 | S: Whenever a mendicant knows that they breathe heavily, | T: “Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu, breathing in long, understands: ‘I breathe in long,’ or breathing out long, understands: ‘I breathe out long’;
mn118:24.2 | S: or lightly, | T: breathing in short, understands: ‘I breathe in short,’ or breathing out short, understands: ‘I breathe out short’;
mn118:24.3 | S: or experiencing the whole body, | T: trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in experiencing the whole body of breath’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out experiencing the whole body of breath’;
mn118:24.4 | S: or stilling the physical process— | T: trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in tranquillising the bodily formation’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out tranquillising the bodily formation’—
mn118:24.5 | S: at that time they’re meditating by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. | T: on that occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
mn118:24.6 | S: For I say that the in-breaths and out-breaths are an aspect of the body. | T: I say that this is a certain body among the bodies, namely, in-breathing and out-breathing.
mn118:24.7 | S: That’s why at that time a mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. | T: That is why on that occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
mn118:25.1 | S: Whenever a mendicant practices breathing while experiencing rapture, | T: “Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in experiencing rapture’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out experiencing rapture’;
mn118:25.2 | S: or experiencing bliss, | T: trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in experiencing pleasure’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out experiencing pleasure’;
mn118:25.3 | S: or experiencing the mental process, | T: trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in experiencing the mental formation’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out experiencing the mental formation’;
mn118:25.4 | S: or stilling the mental process— | T: trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in tranquillising the mental formation’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out tranquillising the mental formation’—
mn118:25.5 | S: at that time they meditate observing an aspect of feelings—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. | T: on that occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating feelings as feelings, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
mn118:25.6 | S: For I say that careful application of mind to the in-breaths and out-breaths is an aspect of feelings. | T: I say that this is a certain feeling among the feelings, namely, giving close attention to in-breathing and out-breathing.
mn118:25.7 | S: That’s why at that time a mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of feelings—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. | T: That is why on that occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating feelings as feelings, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
mn118:26.1 | S: Whenever a mendicant practices breathing while experiencing the mind, | T: “Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in experiencing the mind’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out experiencing the mind’;
mn118:26.2 | S: or gladdening the mind, | T: trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in gladdening the mind’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out gladdening the mind’;
mn118:26.3 | S: or immersing the mind in samādhi, | T: trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in concentrating the mind’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out concentrating the mind’;
mn118:26.4 | S: or freeing the mind— | T: trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in liberating the mind’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out liberating the mind’—
mn118:26.5 | S: at that time they meditate observing an aspect of the mind—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. | T: on that occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind as mind, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
mn118:26.6 | S: There is no development of mindfulness of breathing for someone who is unmindful and lacks awareness, I say. | T: I do not say that there is the development of mindfulness of breathing for one who is forgetful, who is not fully aware.
mn118:26.7 | S: That’s why at that time a mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of the mind—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. | T: That is why on that occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind as mind, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
mn118:27.1 | S: Whenever a mendicant practices breathing while observing impermanence, | T: “Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in contemplating impermanence’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out contemplating impermanence’;
mn118:27.2 | S: or observing fading away, | T: trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in contemplating fading away’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out contemplating fading away’;
mn118:27.3 | S: or observing cessation, | T: trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in contemplating cessation’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out contemplating cessation’;
mn118:27.4 | S: or observing letting go— | T: trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in contemplating relinquishment’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out contemplating relinquishment’—
mn118:27.5 | S: at that time they meditate observing an aspect of principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. | T: on that occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
mn118:27.6 | S: Having seen with wisdom the giving up of covetousness and displeasure, they watch over closely with equanimity. | T: Having seen with wisdom the abandoning of covetousness and grief, he closely looks on with equanimity.
mn118:27.7 | S: That’s why at that time a mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. | T: That is why on that occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
mn118:28.1 | S: That’s how mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated, fulfills the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. | T: “Bhikkhus, that is how mindfulness of breathing, developed and cultivated, fulfils the four foundations of mindfulness.
mn118:29.1 | S: And how are the four kinds of mindfulness meditation developed and cultivated so as to fulfill the seven awakening factors? | T: Fulfilment of the Seven Enlightenment Factors “And how, bhikkhus, do the four foundations of mindfulness, developed and cultivated, fulfil the seven enlightenment factors?
mn118:30.1 | S: Whenever a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body, at that time their mindfulness is established and lucid. | T: “Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world—on that occasion unremitting mindfulness is established in him.
mn118:30.2 | S: At such a time, a mendicant has initiated the awakening factor of mindfulness; they develop it and perfect it. | T: On whatever occasion unremitting mindfulness is established in a bhikkhu—on that occasion the mindfulness enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development, it comes to fulfilment in him.
mn118:31.1 | S: As they live mindfully in this way they investigate, explore, and inquire into that principle with wisdom. | T: “Abiding thus mindful, he investigates and examines that state with wisdom and embarks upon a full inquiry into it.
mn118:31.2 | S: At such a time, a mendicant has initiated the awakening factor of investigation of principles; they develop it and perfect it. | T: On whatever occasion, abiding thus mindful, a bhikkhu investigates and examines that state with wisdom and embarks upon a full inquiry into it—on that occasion the investigation-of-states enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.
mn118:32.1 | S: As they investigate principles with wisdom in this way their energy is roused up and unflagging. | T: “In one who investigates and examines that state with wisdom and embarks upon a full inquiry into it, tireless energy is aroused.
mn118:32.2 | S: At such a time, a mendicant has initiated the awakening factor of energy; they develop it and perfect it. | T: On whatever occasion tireless energy is aroused in a bhikkhu who investigates and examines that state with wisdom and embarks upon a full inquiry into it—on that occasion the energy enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.
mn118:33.1 | S: When they’re energetic, rapture not of the flesh arises. | T: “In one who has aroused energy, unworldly rapture arises.
mn118:33.2 | S: At such a time, a mendicant has initiated the awakening factor of rapture; they develop it and perfect it. | T: On whatever occasion unworldly rapture arises in a bhikkhu who has aroused energy— on that occasion the rapture enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.
mn118:34.1 | S: When the mind is full of rapture, the body and mind become tranquil. | T: “In one who is rapturous, the body and the mind become tranquil.
mn118:34.2 | S: At such a time, a mendicant has initiated the awakening factor of tranquility; they develop it and perfect it. | T: On whatever occasion the body and the mind become tranquil in a bhikkhu who is rapturous—on that occasion the tranquillity enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.
mn118:35.1 | S: When the body is tranquil and they feel bliss, the mind becomes immersed in samādhi. | T: “In one whose body is tranquil and who feels pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated.
mn118:35.2 | S: At such a time, a mendicant has initiated the awakening factor of immersion; they develop it and perfect it. | T: On whatever occasion the mind becomes concentrated in a bhikkhu whose body is tranquil and who feels pleasure—on that occasion the concentration enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.
mn118:36.1 | S: They closely watch over that mind immersed in samādhi. | T: “He closely looks on with equanimity at the mind thus concentrated.
mn118:36.2 | S: At such a time, a mendicant has initiated the awakening factor of equanimity; they develop it and perfect it. | T: On whatever occasion a bhikkhu closely looks on with equanimity at the mind thus concentrated—on that occasion the equanimity enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.
mn118:37.1 | S: Whenever a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of feelings … | T: “Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating feelings as feelings, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world…repeat as at §§30–36…the equanimity enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.
mn118:38.1 | S: mind … | T: “Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind as mind, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world…repeat as at §§30–36…the equanimity enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.
mn118:38.2 | S: principles, at that time their mindfulness is established and lucid. | T: “Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world…repeat as at §§30–36…
mn118:38.3 | S: At such a time, a mendicant has initiated the awakening factor of mindfulness … | T: (none)
mn118:38.4 | P: So tathāsato viharanto taṁ dhammaṁ paññāya pavicinati pavicayati parivīmaṁsaṁ āpajjati. | T: (none)
mn118:38.5 | S: investigation of principles … | T: (none)
mn118:38.6 | P: Tassa taṁ dhammaṁ paññāya pavicinato pavicayato parivīmaṁsaṁ āpajjato āraddhaṁ hoti vīriyaṁ asallīnaṁ. | T: (none)
mn118:38.7 | S: energy … | T: (none)
mn118:38.8 | P: Āraddhavīriyassa uppajjati pīti nirāmisā. | T: (none)
mn118:38.9 | S: rapture … | T: (none)
mn118:38.10 | P: Pītimanassa kāyopi passambhati, cittampi passambhati. | T: (none)
mn118:38.11 | S: tranquility … | T: (none)
mn118:38.12 | P: Passaddhakāyassa sukhino cittaṁ samādhiyati. | T: (none)
mn118:38.13 | S: immersion … | T: (none)
mn118:39.1 | P: So tathāsamāhitaṁ cittaṁ sādhukaṁ ajjhupekkhitā hoti. | T: (none)
mn118:39.2 | S: equanimity. | T: …the equanimity enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.
mn118:40.1 | S: That’s how the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, when developed and cultivated, fulfill the seven awakening factors. | T: “Bhikkhus, that is how the four foundations of mindfulness, developed and cultivated, fulfil the seven enlightenment factors.
mn118:41.1 | S: And how are the seven awakening factors developed and cultivated so as to fulfill knowledge and freedom? | T: Fulfilment of True Knowledge and Deliverance “And how, bhikkhus, do the seven enlightenment factors, developed and cultivated, fulfil true knowledge and deliverance?
mn118:42.1 | S: It’s when a mendicant develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, | T: “Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu develops the mindfulness enlightenment factor, which is supported by seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, and ripens in relinquishment.
mn118:42.2 | S: investigation of principles, | T: He develops the investigation-of-states enlightenment factor…
mn118:42.3 | S: energy, | T: the energy enlightenment factor…
mn118:42.4 | S: rapture, | T: the rapture enlightenment factor…
mn118:42.5 | S: tranquility, | T: the tranquillity enlightenment factor…
mn118:42.6 | S: immersion, | T: the concentration enlightenment factor…
mn118:42.7 | S: and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. | T: the equanimity enlightenment factor, which is supported by seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, and ripens in relinquishment.
mn118:43.1 | S: That’s how the seven awakening factors, when developed and cultivated, fulfill knowledge and freedom.” | T: “Bhikkhus, that is how the seven enlightenment factors, developed and cultivated, fulfil true knowledge and deliverance.”
mn118:43.2 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: That is what the Blessed One said.
mn118:43.3 | S: Satisfied, the monks approved what the Buddha said. | T: The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
mn118:43.4 | P: Ānāpānassatisuttaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ aṭṭhamaṁ. | T: (none)

## mn2
mn2:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
mn2:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
mn2:1.3 | S: There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, | T: There he addressed the bhikkhus thus:
mn2:1.4 | S: “Mendicants!” | T: “Bhikkhus.”—
mn2:1.5 | S: “Venerable sir,” they replied. | T: “Venerable sir,” they replied.
mn2:1.6 | S: The Buddha said this: | T: The Blessed One said this:
mn2:2.1 | S: “Mendicants, I will teach you the explanation of the restraint of all defilements. | T: “Bhikkhus, I shall teach you a discourse on the restraint of all the taints.
mn2:2.2 | S: Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.” | T: Listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”—
mn2:2.3 | S: “Yes, sir,” they replied. | T: “Yes, venerable sir,” the bhikkhus replied.
mn2:2.4 | S: The Buddha said this: | T: The Blessed One said this:
mn2:3.1 | S: “Mendicants, I say that the ending of defilements is for one who knows and sees, not for one who does not know or see. | T: Summary “Bhikkhus, I say that the destruction of the taints is for one who knows and sees, not for one who does not know and see.
mn2:3.2 | S: For one who knows and sees what? | T: Who knows and sees what?
mn2:3.3 | S: Rational application of mind and irrational application of mind. | T: Wise attention and unwise attention.
mn2:3.4 | S: When you apply the mind irrationally, defilements arise, and once arisen they grow. | T: When one attends unwisely, unarisen taints arise and arisen taints increase.
mn2:3.5 | S: When you apply the mind rationally, defilements don’t arise, and those that have already arisen are given up. | T: When one attends wisely, unarisen taints do not arise and arisen taints are abandoned.
mn2:4.1 | S: Some defilements should be given up by seeing, some by restraint, some by using, some by enduring, some by avoiding, some by dispelling, and some by developing. | T: “Bhikkhus, there are taints that should be abandoned by seeing. There are taints that should be abandoned by restraining. There are taints that should be abandoned by using. There are taints that should be abandoned by enduring. There are taints that should be abandoned by avoiding. There are taints that should be abandoned by removing. There are taints that should be abandoned by developing.
mn2:5.0 | S: 1. Defilements Given Up by Seeing | T: Taints to be Abandoned by Seeing
mn2:5.1 | S: And what are the defilements that should be given up by seeing? | T: “What taints, bhikkhus, should be abandoned by seeing?
mn2:5.2 | S: Take an unlearned ordinary person who has not seen the noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve not seen true persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the true persons. | T: Here, bhikkhus, an untaught ordinary person, who has no regard for noble ones and is unskilled and undisciplined in their Dhamma, who has no regard for true men and is unskilled and undisciplined in their Dhamma,
mn2:5.3 | S: They don’t understand to which things they should apply the mind and to which things they should not apply the mind. | T: does not understand what things are fit for attention and what things are unfit for attention.
mn2:5.4 | S: So they apply the mind to things they shouldn’t and don’t apply the mind to things they should. | T: Since that is so, he attends to those things unfit for attention and he does not attend to those things fit for attention.
mn2:6.1 | S: And what are the things to which they apply the mind but should not? | T: “What are the things unfit for attention that he attends to?
mn2:6.2 | S: They are the things that, when the mind is applied to them, give rise to unarisen defilements and make arisen defilements grow: the defilements of sensual desire, | T: They are things such that when he attends to them, the unarisen taint of sensual desire arises in him and the arisen taint of sensual desire increases,
mn2:6.3 | S: desire to be reborn, | T: the unarisen taint of being arises in him and the arisen taint of being increases,
mn2:6.4 | S: and ignorance. | T: the unarisen taint of ignorance arises in him and the arisen taint of ignorance increases.
mn2:6.5 | S: These are the things to which they apply the mind but should not. | T: These are the things unfit for attention that he attends to.
mn2:6.6 | S: And what are the things to which they do not apply the mind but should? | T: And what are the things fit for attention that he does not attend to?
mn2:6.7 | S: They are the things that, when the mind is applied to them, do not give rise to unarisen defilements and give up arisen defilements: the defilements of sensual desire, | T: They are things such that when he attends to them, the unarisen taint of sensual desire does not arise in him and the arisen taint of sensual desire is abandoned,
mn2:6.8 | S: desire to be reborn, | T: the unarisen taint of being does not arise in him and the arisen taint of being is abandoned,
mn2:6.9 | S: and ignorance. | T: the unarisen taint of ignorance does not arise in him and the arisen taint of ignorance is abandoned.
mn2:6.10 | S: These are the things to which they do not apply the mind but should. | T: These are the things fit for attention that he does not attend to.
mn2:7.1 | S: Because of applying the mind to what they should not and not applying the mind to what they should, unarisen defilements arise and arisen defilements grow. | T: By attending to things unfit for attention and by not attending to things fit for attention, both unarisen taints arise in him and arisen taints increase.
mn2:7.2 | S: This is how they apply the mind irrationally: | T: “This is how he attends unwisely:
mn2:7.3 | S: ‘Did I exist in the past? Did I not exist in the past? What was I in the past? How was I in the past? After being what, what did I become in the past? | T: ‘Was I in the past? Was I not in the past? What was I in the past? How was I in the past? Having been what, what did I become in the past?
mn2:7.4 | S: Will I exist in the future? Will I not exist in the future? What will I be in the future? How will I be in the future? After being what, what will I become in the future?’ | T: Shall I be in the future? Shall I not be in the future? What shall I be in the future? How shall I be in the future? Having been what, what shall I become in the future?’
mn2:7.5 | S: Or they are undecided about the present thus: | T: Or else he is inwardly perplexed about the present thus:
mn2:7.6 | S: ‘Am I? Am I not? What am I? How am I? This sentient being—where did it come from? And where will it go?’ | T: ‘Am I? Am I not? What am I? How am I? Where has this being come from? Where will it go?’
mn2:8.1 | S: When they apply the mind irrationally in this way, one of the following six views arises in them and is taken as a genuine fact. | T: “When he attends unwisely in this way, one of six views arises in him.
mn2:8.2 | S: The view: ‘My self survives.’ | T: The view ‘self exists for me’ arises in him as true and established;
mn2:8.3 | S: The view: ‘My self does not survive.’ | T: or the view ‘no self exists for me’ arises in him as true and established;
mn2:8.4 | S: The view: ‘I perceive the self with the self.’ | T: or the view ‘I perceive self with self’ arises in him as true and established;
mn2:8.5 | S: The view: ‘I perceive what is not-self with the self.’ | T: or the view ‘I perceive not-self with self’ arises in him as true and established;
mn2:8.6 | S: The view: ‘I perceive the self with what is not-self.’ | T: or the view ‘I perceive self with not-self’ arises in him as true and established;
mn2:8.7 | S: Or they have such a view: | T: or else he has some such view as this:
mn2:8.8 | S: ‘This self of mine is he, the one who speaks, the one who knows, who experiences the results of good and bad deeds in all the different realms. This self is permanent, everlasting, eternal, and imperishable, and will last forever and ever.’ | T: ‘It is this self of mine that speaks and feels and experiences here and there the result of good and bad actions; but this self of mine is permanent, everlasting, eternal, not subject to change, and it will endure as long as eternity.’
mn2:8.9 | S: This is called a misconception, the thicket of views, the desert of views, the twist of views, the dodge of views, the fetter of views. | T: This speculative view, bhikkhus, is called the thicket of views, the wilderness of views, the contortion of views, the vacillation of views, the fetter of views.
mn2:8.10 | S: An unlearned ordinary person who is fettered by views is not freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. | T: Fettered by the fetter of views, the untaught ordinary person is not freed from birth, ageing, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair;
mn2:8.11 | S: They’re not freed from suffering, I say. | T: he is not freed from suffering, I say.
mn2:9.1 | P: Sutavā ca kho, bhikkhave, ariyasāvako— | T: “Bhikkhus, a well-taught noble disciple,
mn2:9.2 | S: But take a learned noble disciple who has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve seen true persons, and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the true persons. | T: who has regard for noble ones and is skilled and disciplined in their Dhamma, who has regard for true men and is skilled and disciplined in their Dhamma,
mn2:9.3 | S: They understand to which things they should apply the mind and to which things they should not apply the mind. | T: understands what things are fit for attention and what things are unfit for attention.
mn2:9.4 | S: So they apply the mind to things they should and don’t apply the mind to things they shouldn’t. | T: Since that is so, he does not attend to those things unfit for attention and he attends to those things fit for attention.
mn2:10.1 | S: And what are the things to which they don’t apply the mind and should not? | T: “What are the things unfit for attention that he does not attend to?
mn2:10.2 | S: They are the things that, when the mind is applied to them, give rise to unarisen defilements and make arisen defilements grow: the defilements of sensual desire, | T: They are things such that when he attends to them, the unarisen taint of sensual desire arises in him…as §6…and the arisen taint of ignorance increases.
mn2:10.3 | S: desire to be reborn, | T: (none)
mn2:10.4 | S: and ignorance. | T: (none)
mn2:10.5 | S: These are the things to which they don’t apply the mind and should not. | T: These are the things unfit for attention that he does not attend to.
mn2:10.6 | S: And what are the things to which they do apply the mind and should? | T: And what are the things fit for attention that he attends to?
mn2:10.7 | S: They are the things that, when the mind is applied to them, do not give rise to unarisen defilements and give up arisen defilements: the defilements of sensual desire, | T: They are things such that when he attends to them, the unarisen taint of sensual desire does not arise in him…as §6…and the arisen taint of ignorance is abandoned.
mn2:10.8 | S: desire to be reborn, | T: (none)
mn2:10.9 | S: and ignorance. | T: (none)
mn2:10.10 | S: These are the things to which they do apply the mind and should. | T: These are the things fit for attention that he attends to.
mn2:10.11 | S: Because of not applying the mind to what they should not and applying the mind to what they should, unarisen defilements don’t arise and arisen defilements are given up. | T: By not attending to things unfit for attention and by attending to things fit for attention, unarisen taints do not arise in him and arisen taints are abandoned.
mn2:11.1 | S: They rationally apply the mind: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. | T: “He attends wisely: ‘This is suffering’; he attends wisely: ‘This is the origin of suffering’; he attends wisely: ‘This is the cessation of suffering’; he attends wisely: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
mn2:11.2 | S: And as they do so, they give up three fetters: | T: When he attends wisely in this way, three fetters are abandoned in him:
mn2:11.3 | S: substantialist view, doubt, and misapprehension of precepts and observances. | T: personality view, doubt, and adherence to rules and observances.
mn2:11.4 | S: These are called the defilements that should be given up by seeing. | T: These are called the taints that should be abandoned by seeing.
mn2:12.0 | S: 2. Defilements Given Up by Restraint | T: Taints to be Abandoned by Restraining
mn2:12.1 | S: And what are the defilements that should be given up by restraint? | T: “What taints, bhikkhus, should be abandoned by restraining?
mn2:12.2 | S: Take a mendicant who, reflecting rationally, lives restraining the eye faculty. | T: Here a bhikkhu, reflecting wisely, abides with the eye faculty restrained.
mn2:12.3 | S: For the distressing and feverish defilements that might arise in someone who lives without restraint of the eye faculty do not arise when there is such restraint. | T: While taints, vexation, and fever might arise in one who abides with the eye faculty unrestrained, there are no taints, vexation, or fever in one who abides with the eye faculty restrained.
mn2:12.4 | S: Reflecting rationally, they live restraining the ear faculty … | T: Reflecting wisely, he abides with the ear faculty restrained…
mn2:12.5 | S: the nose faculty … | T: with the nose faculty restrained…
mn2:12.6 | S: the tongue faculty … | T: with the tongue faculty restrained…
mn2:12.7 | S: the body faculty … | T: with the body faculty restrained…
mn2:12.8 | S: the mind faculty. | T: with the mind faculty restrained…While taints,
mn2:12.9 | S: For the distressing and feverish defilements that might arise in someone who lives without restraint of the mind faculty do not arise when there is such restraint. | T: (none)
mn2:12.10 | S: For the distressing and feverish defilements that might arise in someone who lives without restraint do not arise when there is such restraint. | T: vexation, and fever might arise in one who abides with the faculties unrestrained, there are no taints, vexation, or fever in one who abides with the faculties restrained.
mn2:12.11 | S: These are called the defilements that should be given up by restraint. | T: These are called the taints that should be abandoned by restraining.
mn2:13.0 | S: 3. Defilements Given Up by Using | T: Taints to be Abandoned by Using
mn2:13.1 | S: And what are the defilements that should be given up by using? | T: “What taints, bhikkhus, should be abandoned by using?
mn2:13.2 | S: Take a mendicant who, reflecting rationally, makes use of robes: | T: Here a bhikkhu, reflecting wisely, uses the robe
mn2:13.3 | S: ‘Only for the sake of warding off cold and heat; for warding off the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles; and for covering up the private parts.’ | T: only for protection from cold, for protection from heat, for protection from contact with gadflies, mosquitoes, wind, the sun, and creeping things, and only for the purpose of concealing the private parts.
mn2:14.1 | S: Reflecting rationally, they make use of almsfood: | T: “Reflecting wisely, he uses almsfood
mn2:14.2 | S: ‘Not for fun, indulgence, adornment, or decoration, but only to sustain this body, to avoid harm, and to support spiritual practice. In this way, I shall put an end to old discomfort and not give rise to new discomfort, and I will have the means to keep going, blamelessness, and a comfortable abiding.’ | T: neither for amusement nor for intoxication nor for the sake of physical beauty and attractiveness, but only for the endurance and continuance of this body, for ending discomfort, and for assisting the holy life, considering: ‘Thus I shall terminate old feelings without arousing new feelings and I shall be healthy and blameless and shall live in comfort.’
mn2:15.1 | S: Reflecting rationally, they make use of lodgings: | T: “Reflecting wisely, he uses the resting place
mn2:15.2 | S: ‘Only for the sake of warding off cold and heat; for warding off the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles; to shelter from harsh weather and to enjoy retreat.’ | T: only for protection from cold, for protection from heat, for protection from contact with gadflies, mosquitoes, wind, the sun, and creeping things, and only for the purpose of warding off the perils of climate and for enjoying retreat.
mn2:16.1 | S: Reflecting rationally, they make use of medicines and supplies for the sick: | T: “Reflecting wisely, he uses the medicinal requisites
mn2:16.2 | S: ‘Only for the sake of warding off the pains of illness and to promote good health.’ | T: only for protection from arisen afflicting feelings and for the benefit of good health.
mn2:17.1 | S: For the distressing and feverish defilements that might arise in someone who lives without using these things do not arise when they are used. | T: “While taints, vexation, and fever might arise in one who does not use the requisites thus, there are no taints, vexation, or fever in one who uses them thus.
mn2:17.2 | S: These are called the defilements that should be given up by using. | T: These are called the taints that should be abandoned by using.
mn2:18.0 | S: 4. Defilements Given Up by Enduring | T: Taints to be Abandoned by Enduring
mn2:18.1 | S: And what are the defilements that should be given up by enduring? | T: “What taints, bhikkhus, should be abandoned by enduring?
mn2:18.2 | S: Take a mendicant who, reflecting rationally, endures cold, heat, hunger, and thirst. They endure the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles. They endure rude and unwelcome criticism. And they put up with physical pain—sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant, disagreeable, and life-threatening. | T: Here a bhikkhu, reflecting wisely, bears cold and heat, hunger and thirst, and contact with gadflies, mosquitoes, wind, the sun, and creeping things; he endures ill-spoken, unwelcome words and arisen bodily feelings that are painful, racking, sharp, piercing, disagreeable, distressing, and menacing to life.
mn2:18.3 | S: For the distressing and feverish defilements that might arise in someone who lives without enduring these things do not arise when they are endured. | T: While taints, vexation, and fever might arise in one who does not endure such things, there are no taints, vexation, or fever in one who endures them.
mn2:18.4 | S: These are called the defilements that should be given up by enduring. | T: These are called the taints that should be abandoned by enduring.
mn2:19.0 | S: 5. Defilements Given Up by Avoiding | T: Taints to be Abandoned by Avoiding
mn2:19.1 | S: And what are the defilements that should be given up by avoiding? | T: “What taints, bhikkhus, should be abandoned by avoiding?
mn2:19.2 | S: Take a mendicant who, reflecting rationally, avoids a wild elephant, a wild horse, a wild ox, a wild dog, a snake, a stump, thorny ground, a pit, a cliff, a swamp, and a sewer. | T: Here a bhikkhu, reflecting wisely, avoids a wild elephant, a wild horse, a wild bull, a wild dog, a snake, a stump, a bramble patch, a chasm, a cliff, a cesspit, a sewer.
mn2:19.3 | S: Reflecting rationally, they avoid sitting on inappropriate seats, walking in inappropriate neighborhoods, and mixing with bad friends—whatever sensible spiritual companions would believe to be a bad setting. | T: Reflecting wisely, he avoids sitting on unsuitable seats, wandering to unsuitable resorts, and associating with bad friends, since if he were to do so wise companions in the holy life might suspect him of evil conduct.
mn2:19.4 | S: For the distressing and feverish defilements that might arise in someone who lives without avoiding these things do not arise when they are avoided. | T: While taints, vexation, and fever might arise in one who does not avoid these things, there are no taints, vexation, and fever in one who avoids them.
mn2:19.5 | S: These are called the defilements that should be given up by avoiding. | T: These are called the taints that should be abandoned by avoiding.
mn2:20.0 | S: 6. Defilements Given Up by Dispelling | T: Taints to be Abandoned by Removing
mn2:20.1 | S: And what are the defilements that should be given up by dispelling? | T: “What taints, bhikkhus, should be abandoned by removing?
mn2:20.2 | S: Take a mendicant who, reflecting rationally, doesn’t tolerate a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought that has arisen, but gives it up, dispels it, eliminates it, and obliterates it. They don’t tolerate any bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen, but give them up, dispel them, eliminate them, and obliterate them. | T: Here a bhikkhu, reflecting wisely, does not tolerate an arisen thought of sensual desire; he abandons it, removes it, does away with it, and annihilates it. He does not tolerate an arisen thought of ill will…He does not tolerate an arisen thought of cruelty…He does not tolerate arisen evil unwholesome states; he abandons them, removes them, does away with them, and annihilates them.
mn2:20.3 | S: For the distressing and feverish defilements that might arise in someone who lives without dispelling these things do not arise when they are dispelled. | T: While taints, vexation, and fever might arise in one who does not remove these thoughts, there are no taints, vexation, or fever in one who removes them.
mn2:20.4 | S: These are called the defilements that should be given up by dispelling. | T: These are called the taints that should be abandoned by removing.
mn2:21.0 | S: 7. Defilements Given Up by Developing | T: Taints to be Abandoned by Developing
mn2:21.1 | S: And what are the defilements that should be given up by developing? | T: “What taints, bhikkhus, should be abandoned by developing?
mn2:21.2 | S: Take a mendicant who, reflecting rationally, develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, | T: Here a bhikkhu, reflecting wisely, develops the mindfulness enlightenment factor, which is supported by seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, and ripens in relinquishment.
mn2:21.3 | S: investigation of principles, | T: He develops the investigation-of-states enlightenment factor…
mn2:21.4 | S: energy, | T: the energy enlightenment factor…
mn2:21.5 | S: rapture, | T: the rapture enlightenment factor…
mn2:21.6 | S: tranquility, | T: the tranquillity enlightenment factor…
mn2:21.7 | S: immersion, | T: the concentration enlightenment factor…
mn2:21.8 | S: and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. | T: the equanimity enlightenment factor, which is supported by seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, and ripens in relinquishment.
mn2:21.9 | S: For the distressing and feverish defilements that might arise in someone who lives without developing these things do not arise when they are developed. | T: While taints, vexation, and fever might arise in one who does not develop these enlightenment factors, there are no taints, vexation, or fever in one who develops them.
mn2:21.10 | S: These are called the defilements that should be given up by developing. | T: These are called the taints that should be abandoned by developing.
mn2:22.1 | S: Now, take a mendicant who, by seeing, has given up the defilements that should be given up by seeing. By restraint, they’ve given up the defilements that should be given up by restraint. By using, they’ve given up the defilements that should be given up by using. By enduring, they’ve given up the defilements that should be given up by enduring. By avoiding, they’ve given up the defilements that should be given up by avoiding. By dispelling, they’ve given up the defilements that should be given up by dispelling. By developing, they’ve given up the defilements that should be given up by developing. | T: Conclusion “Bhikkhus, when for a bhikkhu the taints that should be abandoned by seeing have been abandoned by seeing, when the taints that should be abandoned by restraining have been abandoned by restraining, when the taints that should be abandoned by using have been abandoned by using, when the taints that should be abandoned by enduring have been abandoned by enduring, when the taints that should be abandoned by avoiding have been abandoned by avoiding, when the taints that should be abandoned by removing have been abandoned by removing, when the taints that should be abandoned by developing have been abandoned by developing—
mn2:22.2 | S: They’re called a mendicant who lives having restrained all defilements, who has cut off craving, cast off the fetters, and by rightly comprehending conceit has made an end of suffering.” | T: then he is called a bhikkhu who dwells restrained with the restraint of all the taints. He has severed craving, flung off the fetters, and with the complete penetration of conceit he has made an end of suffering.”
mn2:22.3 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: That is what the Blessed One said.
mn2:22.4 | S: Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said. | T: The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
mn2:22.5 | P: Sabbāsavasuttaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ dutiyaṁ. | T: (none)

## mn117
mn117:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
mn117:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
mn117:1.3 | S: There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, | T: There he addressed the bhikkhus thus:
mn117:1.4 | S: “Mendicants!” | T: “Bhikkhus.”—
mn117:1.5 | S: “Venerable sir,” they replied. | T: “Venerable sir,” they replied.
mn117:1.6 | S: The Buddha said this: | T: The Blessed One said this:
mn117:2.1 | S: “Mendicants, I will teach you noble right immersion with its vital conditions and its prerequisites. | T: “Bhikkhus, I shall teach you noble right concentration with its supports and its requisites.
mn117:2.2 | S: Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.” | T: Listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”—
mn117:2.3 | S: “Yes, sir,” they replied. | T: “Yes, venerable sir,” the bhikkhus replied.
mn117:2.4 | S: The Buddha said this: | T: The Blessed One said this:
mn117:3.1 | S: “And what is noble right immersion with its vital conditions and its prerequisites? | T: “What, bhikkhus, is noble right concentration with its supports and its requisites,
mn117:3.2 | S: They are: right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, and right mindfulness. | T: that is, right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, and right mindfulness?
mn117:3.3 | S: Unification of mind with these seven factors as prerequisites | T: Unification of mind equipped with these seven factors is called noble right concentration with its supports and its requisites.
mn117:3.4 | S: is called noble right immersion ‘with its vital conditions’ and also ‘with its prerequisites’. | T: (none)
mn117:4.1 | S: In this context, right view comes first. | T: View “Therein, bhikkhus, right view comes first.
mn117:4.2 | S: And how does right view come first? | T: And how does right view come first?
mn117:4.3 | S: When you understand wrong view as wrong view and right view as right view, that’s your right view. | T: One understands wrong view as wrong view and right view as right view: this is one’s right view.
mn117:5.1 | S: And what is wrong view? | T: “And what, bhikkhus, is wrong view?
mn117:5.2 | S: ‘There’s no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There’s no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There’s no afterlife. There’s no such thing as mother and father, or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there’s no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ | T: ‘There is nothing given, nothing offered, nothing sacrificed; no fruit or result of good and bad actions; no this world, no other world; no mother, no father; no beings who are reborn spontaneously; no good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who have realised for themselves by direct knowledge and declare this world and the other world.’
mn117:5.3 | S: This is wrong view. | T: This is wrong view.
mn117:6.1 | S: And what is right view? | T: “And what, bhikkhus, is right view?
mn117:6.2 | S: Right view is twofold, I say. | T: Right view, I say, is twofold:
mn117:6.3 | S: There is right view that is accompanied by defilements, partakes of good deeds, and ripens in attachments. | T: there is right view that is affected by taints, partaking of merit, ripening in the acquisitions;
mn117:6.4 | S: And there is right view that is noble, undefiled, transcendent, a factor of the path. | T: and there is right view that is noble, taintless, supramundane, a factor of the path.
mn117:7.1 | S: And what is right view that is accompanied by defilements, partakes of good deeds, and ripens in attachments? | T: “And what, bhikkhus, is right view that is affected by the taints, partaking of merit, ripening in the acquisitions?
mn117:7.2 | S: ‘There is meaning in giving, sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother and father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ | T: ‘There is what is given and what is offered and what is sacrificed; there is fruit and result of good and bad actions; there is this world and the other world; there is mother and father; there are beings who are reborn spontaneously; there are in the world good and virtuous recluses and brahmins who have realised for themselves by direct knowledge and declare this world and the other world.’
mn117:7.3 | S: This is right view that is accompanied by defilements, partakes of good deeds, and ripens in attachments. | T: This is right view affected by taints, partaking of merit, ripening in the acquisitions.
mn117:8.1 | S: And what is right view that is noble, undefiled, transcendent, a factor of the path? | T: “And what, bhikkhus, is right view that is noble, taintless, supramundane, a factor of the path?
mn117:8.2 | S: It’s the wisdom—the faculty of wisdom, the power of wisdom, the awakening factor of investigation of principles, and right view as a factor of the path—in one intent on the noble, intent on the undefiled, who possesses the noble path and develops the noble path. | T: The wisdom, the faculty of wisdom, the power of wisdom, the investigation-of-states enlightenment factor, the path factor of right view in one whose mind is noble, whose mind is taintless, who possesses the noble path and is developing the noble path:
mn117:8.3 | S: This is called right view that is noble, undefiled, transcendent, a factor of the path. | T: this is right view that is noble, taintless, supramundane, a factor of the path.
mn117:9.1 | S: They make an effort to give up wrong view and embrace right view: that’s their right effort. | T: “One makes an effort to abandon wrong view and to enter upon right view: this is one’s right effort.
mn117:9.2 | S: Mindfully they give up wrong view and embrace right view: that’s their right mindfulness. | T: Mindfully one abandons wrong view, mindfully one enters upon and abides in right view: this is one’s right mindfulness.
mn117:9.3 | S: So these three things keep running and circling around right view, namely: right view, right effort, and right mindfulness. | T: Thus these three states run and circle around right view, that is, right view, right effort, and right mindfulness.
mn117:10.1 | S: In this context, right view comes first. | T: Intention “Therein, bhikkhus, right view comes first.
mn117:10.2 | S: And how does right view come first? | T: And how does right view come first?
mn117:10.3 | S: When you understand wrong purpose as wrong purpose and right purpose as right purpose, that’s your right view. | T: One understands wrong intention as wrong intention and right intention as right intention: this is one’s right view.
mn117:11.1 | S: And what is wrong purpose? | T: “And what, bhikkhus, is wrong intention?
mn117:11.2 | S: Purposes of sensuality, of malice, and of cruelty. | T: The intention of sensual desire, the intention of ill will, and the intention of cruelty:
mn117:11.3 | S: This is wrong purpose. | T: this is wrong intention.
mn117:12.1 | S: And what is right purpose? | T: “And what, bhikkhus, is right intention?
mn117:12.2 | S: Right purpose is twofold, I say. | T: Right intention, I say, is twofold:
mn117:12.3 | S: There is right purpose that is accompanied by defilements, partakes of good deeds, and ripens in attachments. | T: there is right intention that is affected by taints, partaking of merit, ripening in the acquisitions,
mn117:12.4 | S: And there is right purpose that is noble, undefiled, transcendent, a factor of the path. | T: and there is right intention that is noble, taintless, supramundane, a factor of the path.
mn117:13.1 | S: And what is right purpose that is accompanied by defilements, partakes of good deeds, and ripens in attachments? | T: “And what, bhikkhus, is right intention that is affected by taints, partaking of merit, ripening in the acquisitions?
mn117:13.2 | S: Purposes of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness. | T: The intention of renunciation, the intention of non-ill will, and the intention of non-cruelty:
mn117:13.3 | S: This is right purpose that is accompanied by defilements. | T: this is right intention that is affected by taints…ripening in the acquisitions.
mn117:14.1 | S: And what is right purpose that is noble, undefiled, transcendent, a factor of the path? | T: “And what, bhikkhus, is right intention that is noble, taintless, supramundane, a factor of the path?
mn117:14.2 | S: It’s the thinking—the placing of the mind, thought, planting, implanting, embedding of the mind, verbal process—in one intent on the noble, intent on the undefiled, who possesses the noble path and develops the noble path. | T: The thinking, thought, intention, mental absorption, mental fixity, directing of mind, verbal formation in one whose mind is noble, whose mind is taintless, who possesses the noble path and is developing the noble path:
mn117:14.3 | S: This is right purpose that is noble. | T: this is right intention that is noble…a factor of the path.
mn117:15.1 | S: They make an effort to give up wrong purpose and embrace right purpose: that’s their right effort. | T: “One makes an effort to abandon wrong intention and to enter upon right intention: this is one’s right effort.
mn117:15.2 | S: Mindfully they give up wrong purpose and take up right purpose: that’s their right mindfulness. | T: Mindfully one abandons wrong intention, mindfully one enters upon and abides in right intention: this is one’s right mindfulness.
mn117:15.3 | S: So these three things keep running and circling around right purpose, namely: right view, right effort, and right mindfulness. | T: Thus these three states run and circle around right intention, that is, right view, right effort, and right mindfulness.
mn117:16.1 | S: In this context, right view comes first. | T: Speech “Therein, bhikkhus, right view comes first.
mn117:16.2 | S: And how does right view come first? | T: And how does right view come first?
mn117:16.3 | S: When you understand wrong speech as wrong speech and right speech as right speech, that’s your right view. | T: One understands wrong speech as wrong speech and right speech as right speech: this is one’s right view.
mn117:17.1 | S: And what is wrong speech? | T: “And what, bhikkhus, is wrong speech?
mn117:17.2 | S: Speech that’s false, backbiting, harsh, or nonsensical. | T: False speech, malicious speech, harsh speech, and gossip:
mn117:17.3 | S: This is wrong speech. | T: this is wrong speech.
mn117:18.1 | S: And what is right speech? | T: “And what, bhikkhus, is right speech?
mn117:18.2 | S: Right speech is twofold, I say. | T: Right speech, I say, is twofold:
mn117:18.3 | S: There is right speech that is accompanied by defilements, partakes of good deeds, and ripens in attachments. | T: there is right speech that is affected by taints, partaking of merit, ripening in the acquisitions;
mn117:18.4 | S: And there is right speech that is noble, undefiled, transcendent, a factor of the path. | T: and there is right speech that is noble, taintless, supramundane, a factor of the path.
mn117:19.1 | S: And what is right speech that is accompanied by defilements, partakes of good deeds, and ripens in attachments? | T: “And what, bhikkhus, is right speech that is affected by taints, partaking of merit, ripening in the acquisitions?
mn117:19.2 | S: Refraining from lying, divisive speech, harsh speech, and talking nonsense. | T: Abstinence from false speech, abstinence from malicious speech, abstinence from harsh speech, abstinence from gossip:
mn117:19.3 | S: This is right speech that is accompanied by defilements. | T: this is right speech that is affected by taints…ripening in the acquisitions.
mn117:20.1 | S: And what is right speech that is noble, undefiled, transcendent, a factor of the path? | T: “And what, bhikkhus, is right speech that is noble, taintless, supramundane, a factor of the path?
mn117:20.2 | S: It’s the desisting, abstaining, abstinence, and refraining from the four kinds of bad verbal conduct in one intent on the noble, intent on the undefiled, who possesses the noble path and develops the noble path. | T: The desisting from the four kinds of verbal misconduct, the abstaining, refraining, abstinence from them in one whose mind is noble, whose mind is taintless, who possesses the noble path and is developing the noble path:
mn117:20.3 | S: This is right speech that is noble. | T: this is right speech that is noble…a factor of the path.
mn117:21.1 | S: They make an effort to give up wrong speech and embrace right speech: that’s their right effort. | T: “One makes an effort to abandon wrong speech and to enter upon right speech: this is one’s right effort.
mn117:21.2 | S: Mindfully they give up wrong speech and take up right speech: that’s their right mindfulness. | T: Mindfully one abandons wrong speech, mindfully one enters upon and abides in right speech: this is one’s right mindfulness.
mn117:21.3 | S: So these three things keep running and circling around right speech, namely: right view, right effort, and right mindfulness. | T: Thus these three states run and circle around right speech, that is, right view, right effort, and right mindfulness.
mn117:22.1 | S: In this context, right view comes first. | T: Action “Therein, bhikkhus, right view comes first.
mn117:22.2 | S: And how does right view come first? | T: And how does right view come first?
mn117:22.3 | S: When you understand wrong action as wrong action and right action as right action, that’s your right view. | T: One understands wrong action as wrong action and right action as right action: this is one’s right view.
mn117:23.1 | S: And what is wrong action? | T: “And what, bhikkhus, is wrong action?
mn117:23.2 | S: Killing living creatures, stealing, and sexual misconduct. | T: Killing living beings, taking what is not given, and misconduct in sensual pleasures:
mn117:23.3 | S: This is wrong action. | T: this is wrong action.
mn117:24.1 | S: And what is right action? | T: “And what, bhikkhus, is right action?
mn117:24.2 | S: Right action is twofold, I say. | T: Right action, I say, is twofold:
mn117:24.3 | S: There is right action that is accompanied by defilements, partakes of good deeds, and ripens in attachments. | T: there is right action that is affected by taints, partaking of merit, ripening in the acquisitions;
mn117:24.4 | S: And there is right action that is noble, undefiled, transcendent, a factor of the path. | T: and there is right action that is noble, taintless, supramundane, a factor of the path.
mn117:25.1 | S: And what is right action that is accompanied by defilements, partakes of good deeds, and ripens in attachments? | T: “And what, bhikkhus, is right action that is affected by taints, partaking of merit, ripening in the acquisitions?
mn117:25.2 | S: Refraining from killing living creatures, stealing, and sexual misconduct. | T: Abstinence from killing living beings, abstinence from taking what is not given, abstinence from misconduct in sensual pleasures:
mn117:25.3 | S: This is right action that is accompanied by defilements. | T: this is right action that is affected by taints…ripening in the acquisitions.
mn117:26.1 | S: And what is right action that is noble, undefiled, transcendent, a factor of the path? | T: “And what, bhikkhus, is right action that is noble, taintless, supramundane, a factor of the path?
mn117:26.2 | S: It’s the desisting, abstaining, abstinence, and refraining from the three kinds of bad bodily conduct in one intent on the noble, intent on the undefiled, who possesses the noble path and develops the noble path. | T: The desisting from the three kinds of bodily misconduct, the abstaining, refraining, abstinence from them in one whose mind is noble, whose mind is taintless, who possesses the noble path and is developing the noble path:
mn117:26.3 | S: This is right action that is noble. | T: this is right action that is noble…a factor of the path.
mn117:27.1 | S: They make an effort to give up wrong action and embrace right action: that’s their right effort. | T: “One makes an effort to abandon wrong action and to enter upon right action: this is one’s right effort.
mn117:27.2 | S: Mindfully they give up wrong action and take up right action: that’s their right mindfulness. | T: Mindfully one abandons wrong action, mindfully one enters upon and dwells in right action: this is one’s right mindfulness.
mn117:27.3 | S: So these three things keep running and circling around right action, namely: right view, right effort, and right mindfulness. | T: Thus these three states run and circle around right action, that is, right view, right effort, and right mindfulness.
