## mn77
mn77:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
mn77:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.
mn77:2.1 | S: Now at that time several very well-known wanderers were residing in their monastery in the peacocks’ feeding ground. | T: Now on that occasion a number of well-known wanderers were staying at the Peacocks’ Sanctuary, the wanderers’ park—
mn77:2.2 | S: They included Annabhāra, Varadhara, Sakuludāyī, and other very well-known wanderers. | T: that is, Annabhāra, Varadhara, and the wanderer Sakuludāyin, as well as other well-known wanderers.
mn77:3.1 | S: Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Rājagaha for alms. | T: Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Rājagaha for alms.
mn77:3.2 | S: Then it occurred to him, | T: Then he thought:
mn77:3.3 | S: “It’s too early to wander for alms in Rājagaha. | T: “It is still too early to wander for alms in Rājagaha.
mn77:3.4 | S: Why don’t I visit the wanderer Sakuludāyī at the monastery for the wanderers in the peacocks’ feeding ground?” | T: Suppose I went to the wanderer Sakuludāyin in the Peacocks’ Sanctuary, the wanderers’ park.”
mn77:4.1 | S: So the Buddha went to the monastery for the wanderers. | T: Then the Blessed One went to the Peacocks’ Sanctuary, the wanderers’ park.
mn77:4.2 | S: Now at that time, Sakuludāyī was sitting together with a large assembly of wanderers making an uproar, a colossal racket. They engaged in all kinds of low talk, such as | T: Now on that occasion the wanderer Sakuludāyin was seated with a large assembly of wanderers who were making an uproar, loudly and noisily talking many kinds of pointless talk,
mn77:4.3 | S: talk about kings, bandits, and chief ministers; talk about armies, threats, and wars; talk about food, drink, clothes, and beds; talk about garlands and fragrances; talk about family, vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and countries; talk about women and heroes; talk at the street market and the place for water pots; talk about the departed; motley talk; tales of land and sea; and talk about being reborn in this or that place. | T: such as talk of kings…as MN76, §4 … whether things are so or are not so.
mn77:4.4 | S: Sakuludāyī saw the Buddha coming off in the distance, | T: Then the wanderer Sakuludāyin saw the Blessed One coming in the distance.
mn77:4.5 | S: and hushed his own assembly, | T: Seeing him, he quieted his own assembly thus:
mn77:4.6 | S: “Be quiet, good fellows, don’t make a sound. | T: “Sirs, be quiet;
mn77:4.7 | P: mā bhonto saddamakattha. | T: sirs, make no noise.
mn77:4.8 | S: Here comes the ascetic Gotama. | T: Here comes the recluse Gotama.
mn77:4.9 | S: The venerable likes quiet and praises quiet. | T: This venerable one likes quiet and commends quiet.
mn77:4.10 | S: Hopefully if he sees that our assembly is quiet he’ll see fit to approach.” | T: Perhaps if he finds our assembly a quiet one, he will think to join us.”
mn77:4.11 | S: Then those wanderers fell silent. | T: Then the wanderers became silent.
mn77:5.1 | S: Then the Buddha approached Sakuludāyī, | T: The Blessed One went to the wanderer Sakuludāyin,
mn77:5.2 | S: who said to him, | T: who said to him:
mn77:5.3 | S: “Let the Blessed One come, sir! | T: “Let the Blessed One come, venerable sir!
mn77:5.4 | S: Welcome to the Blessed One, sir! | T: Welcome to the Blessed One!
mn77:5.5 | S: It’s been a long time since you took the opportunity to come here. | T: It is long since the Blessed One found an opportunity to come here.
mn77:5.6 | S: Please, sir, sit down, this seat is ready.” | T: Let the Blessed One be seated;
mn77:5.7 | P: idamāsanaṁ paññattan”ti. | T: this seat is ready.”
mn77:5.8 | S: The Buddha sat down on the seat spread out, | T: The Blessed One sat down on the seat made ready,
mn77:5.9 | S: while Sakuludāyī took a low seat and sat to one side. | T: and the wanderer Sakuludāyin took a low seat and sat down at one side.
mn77:5.10 | S: The Buddha said to him, | T: When he had done so, the Blessed One asked him:
mn77:5.11 | S: “Udāyī, what were you sitting talking about just now? What conversation was left unfinished?” | T: “For what discussion are you sitting together here now, Udāyin? And what was your discussion that was interrupted?”
mn77:6.1 | S: “Sir, leave aside what we were sitting talking about just now. | T: “Venerable sir, let be the discussion for which we are now sitting together here.
mn77:6.2 | S: It won’t be hard for you to hear about that later. | T: The Blessed One can well hear about it later.
mn77:6.3 | S: Sir, a few days ago several ascetics and brahmins who follow various other religions were sitting together at the debating hall, and this discussion came up among them: | T: In recent days, venerable sir, when recluses and brahmins of various sects have been gathering together and sitting together in the debating hall, this topic has arisen:
mn77:6.4 | S: ‘The people of Aṅga and Magadha are so fortunate, so very fortunate! | T: ‘It is a gain for the people of Anga and Magadha, it is a great gain for the people of Anga and Magadha that these recluses and brahmins,
mn77:6.5 | S: For there are these ascetics and brahmins who lead an order and a community, and tutor a community. They’re well-known and famous religious founders, deemed holy by many people. And they have come down for the rainy season residence at Rājagaha. | T: heads of orders, heads of groups, teachers of groups, well-known and famous founders of sects regarded by many as saints, have come to spend the Rains at Rājagaha.
mn77:6.6 | S: They include Pūraṇa Kassapa, | T: There is this Pūraṇa Kassapa, the head of an order, the head of a group, the teacher of a group, the well-known and famous founder of a sect regarded by many as a saint:
mn77:6.7 | P: sopi rājagahaṁ vassāvāsaṁ osaṭo. | T: he has come to spend the Rains at Rājagaha.
mn77:6.8 | S: the bamboo-staffed ascetic Gosāla, | T: There is also this Makkhali Gosāla…
mn77:6.9 | S: Ajita of the hair blanket, | T: this Ajita Kesakambalin…
mn77:6.10 | S: Pakudha Kaccāyana, | T: this Pakudha Kaccāyana…
mn77:6.11 | S: Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta, | T: this Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta…
mn77:6.12 | S: and the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan. | T: this Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, the head of an order, the head of a group, the teacher of a group, the well-known and famous founder of a sect regarded by many as a saint:
mn77:6.13 | P: sopi rājagahaṁ vassāvāsaṁ osaṭo. | T: he too has come to spend the Rains at Rājagaha.
mn77:6.14 | S: This ascetic Gotama also leads an order and a community, and tutors a community. He’s a well-known and famous religious founder, deemed holy by many people. | T: There is also this recluse Gotama, the head of an order, the head of a group, the teacher of a group, the well-known and famous founder of a sect regarded by many as a saint:
mn77:6.15 | S: And he too has come down for the rains residence at Rājagaha. | T: he too has come to spend the Rains at Rājagaha.
mn77:6.16 | S: Which of these ascetics and brahmins is honored, respected, revered, and venerated by their disciples? And how do their disciples, honoring and respecting them, remain loyal?’ | T: Now among these worthy recluses and brahmins, heads of orders…regarded by many as saints, who is honoured, respected, revered, and venerated by his disciples? And how, honouring and respecting him, do they live in dependence on him?’
mn77:6.17 | S: Some of them said: | T: “Thereupon some said this:
mn77:6.18 | S: ‘This Pūraṇa Kassapa leads an order and a community, and tutors a community. He’s a well-known and famous religious founder, deemed holy by many people. | T: ‘This Pūraṇa Kassapa is the head of an order…regarded by many as a saint,
mn77:6.19 | S: But he’s not honored, respected, revered, and venerated by his disciples. And his disciples, not honoring and respecting him, don’t remain loyal to him. | T: yet he is not honoured, respected, revered, and venerated by his disciples, nor do his disciples live in dependence on him, honouring and respecting him.
mn77:6.20 | S: Once it so happened that he was teaching an assembly of many hundreds. | T: Once Pūraṇa Kassapa was teaching his Dhamma to an assembly of several hundred followers.
mn77:6.21 | S: Then one of his disciples made a noise, | T: Then a certain disciple of his made a noise thus:
mn77:6.22 | S: “My good fellows, don’t ask Pūraṇa Kassapa about that. | T: “Sirs, do not ask Pūraṇa Kassapa this question.
mn77:6.23 | S: He doesn’t know that. | T: He does not know that.
mn77:6.24 | S: I know it. Ask me about it, | T: We know that. Ask us that question.
mn77:6.25 | S: and I’ll answer you.” | T: We will answer that for you, sirs.”
mn77:6.26 | S: Once it so happened that Pūraṇa Kassapa didn’t get his way, though he called out with raised arms, | T: It happened that Pūraṇa Kassapa did not get his way, though he waved his arms and wailed:
mn77:6.27 | S: “Be quiet, good fellows, don’t make a sound. | T: “Be quiet, sirs, make no noise, sirs.
mn77:6.28 | S: They’re not asking you, they’re asking me! | T: They are not asking you, sirs. They are asking us.
mn77:6.29 | S: I’ll answer you!” | T: We will answer them.”
mn77:6.30 | S: Indeed, many of his disciples have left him after refuting his doctrine: | T: Indeed, many of his disciples left him after refuting his doctrine thus:
mn77:6.31 | S: “You don’t understand this teaching and training. I understand this teaching and training. What, you understand this teaching and training? You’re practicing wrong. I’m practicing right. I stay on topic, you don’t. You said last what you should have said first. You said first what you should have said last. What you’ve thought so much about has been disproved. Your doctrine is refuted. Go on, save your doctrine! You’re trapped; get yourself out of this—if you can!” | T: “You do not understand this Dhamma and Discipline. I understand this Dhamma and Discipline. How could you understand this Dhamma and Discipline? Your way is wrong. My way is right. I am consistent. You are inconsistent. What should have been said first, you said last. What should have been said last, you said first. What you had so carefully thought up has been turned inside out. Your doctrine is refuted. You are proved wrong. Go and learn better, or disentangle yourself if you can!”
mn77:6.32 | S: That’s how Pūraṇa Kassapa is not honored, respected, revered, venerated, and esteemed by his disciples. On the contrary, his disciples, not honoring and respecting him, don’t remain loyal to him. | T: Thus Pūraṇa Kassapa is not honoured, respected, revered, and venerated by his disciples, nor do his disciples live in dependence on him, honouring and respecting him.
mn77:6.33 | S: Rather, he’s reviled, and rightly so.’ | T: Indeed, he is scorned by the scorn shown to his Dhamma.’
mn77:6.34 | S: Others said: | T: “And some said this:
mn77:6.35 | S: ‘This bamboo-staffed ascetic Gosāla … | T: ‘This Makkhali Gosāla…
mn77:6.36 | S: Ajita of the hair blanket … | T: this Ajita Kesakambalin…this Pakudha Kaccāyana…
mn77:6.37 | S: Pakudha Kaccāyana … | T: (none)
mn77:6.38 | S: Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta … | T: this Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta…
mn77:6.39 | S: This Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan leads an order and a community, and tutors a community. He’s a well-known and famous religious founder, deemed holy by many people. | T: this Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta is the head of an order…
mn77:6.40 | S: But he’s not honored, respected, revered, and venerated by his disciples. And his disciples, not honoring and respecting him, don’t remain loyal to him. | T: but he is not honoured, respected, revered, and venerated by his disciples, nor do his disciples live in dependence on him, honouring and respecting him.
mn77:6.41 | S: Once it so happened that he was teaching an assembly of many hundreds. | T: (none)
mn77:6.42 | S: Then one of his disciples made a noise, | T: (none)
mn77:6.43 | S: “My good fellows, don’t ask the Jain Ñātika about that. | T: (none)
mn77:6.44 | S: He doesn’t know that. | T: (none)
mn77:6.45 | S: I know it. Ask me about it, | T: (none)
mn77:6.46 | S: and I’ll answer you.” | T: (none)
mn77:6.47 | S: Once it so happened that the Jain Ñātika didn’t get his way, though he called out with raised arms, | T: (none)
mn77:6.48 | S: “Be quiet, good fellows, don’t make a sound. | T: (none)
mn77:6.49 | S: They’re not asking you, they’re asking me! | T: (none)
mn77:6.50 | S: I’ll answer you!” | T: (none)
mn77:6.51 | S: Indeed, many of his disciples have left him after refuting his doctrine: | T: (none)
mn77:6.52 | S: “You don’t understand this teaching and training. I understand this teaching and training. What, you understand this teaching and training? You’re practicing wrong. I’m practicing right. I stay on topic, you don’t. You said last what you should have said first. You said first what you should have said last. What you’ve thought so much about has been disproved. Your doctrine is refuted. Go on, save your doctrine! You’re trapped; get yourself out of this—if you can!” | T: (none)
mn77:6.53 | S: That’s how the Jain Ñātika is not honored, respected, revered, and venerated by his disciples. On the contrary, his disciples, not honoring and respecting him, don’t remain loyal to him. | T: (none)
mn77:6.54 | S: Rather, he’s reviled, and rightly so.’ | T: Indeed, he is scorned by the scorn shown to his Dhamma.’
mn77:6.55 | S: Others said: | T: “And some said this:
mn77:6.56 | S: ‘This ascetic Gotama leads an order and a community, and tutors a community. He’s a well-known and famous religious founder, deemed holy by many people. | T: ‘This recluse Gotama is the head of an order, the head of a group, the teacher of a group, the well-known and famous founder of a sect regarded by many as a saint.
mn77:6.57 | S: He’s honored, respected, revered, and venerated by his disciples. And his disciples, honoring and respecting him, remain loyal to him. | T: He is honoured, respected, revered, and venerated by his disciples, and his disciples live in dependence on him, honouring and respecting him.
mn77:6.58 | S: Once it so happened that he was teaching an assembly of many hundreds. | T: Once the recluse Gotama was teaching his Dhamma to an assembly of several hundred followers
mn77:6.59 | S: Then one of his disciples cleared their throat. | T: and there a certain disciple of his cleared his throat.
mn77:6.60 | S: And one of their spiritual companions nudged them with their knee, to indicate, | T: Thereupon one of his companions in the holy life nudged him with his knee to indicate:
mn77:6.61 | S: “Hush, venerable, don’t make sound! Our teacher, the Blessed One, is teaching!” | T: “Be quiet, venerable sir, make no noise; the Blessed One, the Teacher, is teaching us the Dhamma.”
mn77:6.62 | S: While the ascetic Gotama is teaching an assembly of many hundreds, there is no sound of his disciples coughing or clearing their throats. | T: When the recluse Gotama is teaching the Dhamma to an assembly of several hundred followers, on that occasion there is no sound of his disciples’ coughing or clearing their throats.
mn77:6.63 | S: That large crowd is poised expectantly at the ready, thinking, | T: For then that large assembly is poised in expectancy:
mn77:6.64 | S: “Whatever the Buddha teaches, we shall listen to it.” | T: “Let us hear the Dhamma the Blessed One is about to teach.”
mn77:6.65 | S: It’s like when there’s a person at the crossroads pressing out pure dwarf-bee honey, | T: Just as though a man were at a crossroads pressing out pure honey
mn77:6.66 | S: and a large crowd is poised expectantly at the ready. | T: and a large group of people were poised in expectancy,
mn77:6.67 | S: In the same way, while the ascetic Gotama is teaching an assembly of many hundreds, there is no sound of his disciples coughing or clearing their throats. | T: so too, when the recluse Gotama is teaching the Dhamma to an assembly of several hundred followers, on that occasion there is no sound of his disciples’ coughing or clearing their throats.
mn77:6.68 | S: That large crowd is poised expectantly at the ready, thinking, | T: For then that large assembly is poised in expectancy:
mn77:6.69 | S: “Whatever the Buddha teaches, we shall listen to it.” | T: “Let us hear the Dhamma the Blessed One is about to teach.”
mn77:6.70 | S: Even when disciples of the ascetic Gotama, having clashed with their spiritual companions, resign the training and return to a lesser life, they speak only praise of the Teacher, the teaching, and the Saṅgha. They blame only themselves, not others: “We were unlucky, we had little merit. For even after going forth in such a well explained teaching and training we weren’t able to practice for life the perfectly full and pure spiritual life.” | T: And even those disciples of his who fall out with their companions in the holy life and abandon the training to return to the low life—even they praise the Master and the Dhamma and the Sangha; they blame themselves instead of others, saying: “We were unlucky, we have little merit; for though we went forth into homelessness in such a well-proclaimed Dhamma, we were unable to live the perfect and pure holy life for the rest of our lives.”
mn77:6.71 | S: They become monastery workers or lay followers, and they proceed having undertaken the five precepts. | T: Having become monastery attendants or lay followers, they undertake and observe the five precepts.
mn77:6.72 | S: That’s how the ascetic Gotama is honored, respected, revered, and venerated by his disciples. And that’s how his disciples, honoring and respecting him, remain loyal to him.’” | T: Thus the recluse Gotama is honoured, respected, revered, and venerated by his disciples, and his disciples live in dependence on him, honouring and respecting him.’”
mn77:7.1 | S: “But Udāyī, how many qualities do you see in me, because of which my disciples honor, respect, revere, and venerate me; and honoring and respecting me, they remain loyal to me?” | T: “But, Udāyin, how many qualities do you see in me because of which my disciples honour, respect, revere, and venerate me, and live in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me?”
mn77:8.1 | S: “Sir, I see five such qualities in the Buddha. | T: “Venerable sir, I see five qualities in the Blessed One because of which his disciples honour, respect, revere, and venerate him, and live in dependence on him, honouring and respecting him.
mn77:8.2 | S: What five? | T: What are the five?
mn77:8.3 | S: The Buddha eats little and praises eating little. | T: First, venerable sir, the Blessed One eats little and commends eating little;
mn77:8.4 | S: This is the first such quality I see in the Buddha. | T: this I see as the first quality of the Blessed One because of which his disciples honour, respect, revere, and venerate him, and live in dependence on him, honouring and respecting him.
mn77:8.5 | S: Furthermore, the Buddha is content with any kind of robe, and praises such contentment. | T: Again, venerable sir, the Blessed One is content with any kind of robe and commends contentment with any kind of robe;
mn77:8.6 | S: This is the second such quality I see in the Buddha. | T: this I see as the second quality of the Blessed One…
mn77:8.7 | S: Furthermore, the Buddha is content with any kind of almsfood, and praises such contentment. | T: Again, venerable sir, the Blessed One is content with any kind of almsfood and commends contentment with any kind of almsfood;
mn77:8.8 | S: This is the third such quality I see in the Buddha. | T: this I see as the third quality of the Blessed One…
mn77:8.9 | S: Furthermore, the Buddha is content with any kind of lodging, and praises such contentment. | T: Again, venerable sir, the Blessed One is content with any kind of resting place and commends contentment with any kind of resting place;
mn77:8.10 | S: This is the fourth such quality I see in the Buddha. | T: this I see as the fourth quality of the Blessed One…
mn77:8.11 | S: Furthermore, the Buddha is secluded, and praises seclusion. | T: Again, venerable sir, the Blessed One is secluded and commends seclusion;
mn77:8.12 | S: This is the fifth such quality I see in the Buddha. | T: this I see as the fifth quality of the Blessed One…
mn77:8.13 | S: These are the five qualities I see in the Buddha, because of which his disciples honor, respect, revere, and venerate him; and honoring and respecting him, they remain loyal to him.” | T: Venerable sir, these are the five qualities I see in the Blessed One because of which his disciples honour, respect, revere, and venerate him, and live in dependence on him, honouring and respecting him.”
mn77:9.1 | S: “Suppose, Udāyī, my disciples were loyal to me because I eat little. Well, there are disciples of mine who eat a tumbler of food, or half a tumbler; they eat a wood-apple, or half a wood-apple. | T: “Suppose, Udāyin, my disciples honoured, respected, revered, and venerated me, and lived in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me, with the thought: ‘The recluse Gotama eats little and commends eating little.’ Now there are disciples of mine who live on a cupful or half a cupful of food, a bilva fruit’s or half a bilva fruit’s quantity of food,
mn77:9.2 | S: But sometimes I even eat this bowl full to the brim, or even more. | T: while I sometimes eat the full contents of my almsbowl or even more.
mn77:9.3 | S: So if it were the case that my disciples are loyal to me because I eat little, then those disciples who eat even less would not be loyal to me. | T: So if my disciples honoured me…with the thought: ‘The recluse Gotama eats little and commends eating little,’ then those disciples of mine who live on a cupful of food…should not honour, respect, revere, and venerate me for this quality, nor should they live in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me.
mn77:9.4 | S: Suppose my disciples were loyal to me because I’m content with any kind of robe. Well, there are disciples of mine who have rag robes, wearing shabby robes. They gather scraps from charnel grounds, rubbish dumps, and shops, make them into a patchwork robe and wear it. | T: “Suppose, Udāyin, my disciples honoured, respected, revered, and venerated me, and lived in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me, with the thought: ‘The recluse Gotama is content with any kind of robe and commends contentment with any kind of robe.’ Now there are disciples of mine who are refuse-rag wearers, wearers of coarse robes; they collect rags from the charnel ground, rubbish heaps, or shops, make them into patched robes, and wear them.
mn77:9.5 | S: But sometimes I wear robes offered by householders that are strong, yet next to which bottle-gourd down is coarse. | T: But I sometimes wear robes given by householders, robes so fine that pumpkin hair is coarse in comparison.
mn77:9.6 | S: So if it were the case that my disciples are loyal to me because I’m content with any kind of robe, then those disciples who wear rag robes would not be loyal to me. | T: So if my disciples honoured me…with the thought: ‘The recluse Gotama is content with any kind of robe and commends contentment with any kind of robe,’ then those disciples of mine who are refuse-rag wearers, wearers of coarse robes…should not honour, respect, revere, and venerate me for this quality, nor should they live in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me.
mn77:9.7 | S: Suppose my disciples were loyal to me because I’m content with any kind of almsfood. Well, there are disciples of mine who eat only almsfood, wander indiscriminately for almsfood, happy to eat whatever they glean. When they’ve entered an inhabited area, they don’t consent when invited to sit down. | T: “Suppose, Udāyin, my disciples honoured, respected, revered, and venerated me, and lived in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me, with the thought: ‘The recluse Gotama is content with any kind of almsfood and commends contentment with any kind of almsfood.’ Now there are disciples of mine who are almsfood eaters, who go on unbroken almsround from house to house, who delight in gathering their food; when they have entered among the houses they will not consent even when invited to sit down.
mn77:9.8 | S: But sometimes I even eat by invitation boiled fine rice with the dark grains picked out, served with many soups and sauces. | T: But I sometimes eat on invitation meals of choice rice and many sauces and curries.
mn77:9.9 | S: So if it were the case that my disciples are loyal to me because I’m content with any kind of almsfood, then those disciples who eat only almsfood would not be loyal to me. | T: So if my disciples honoured me…with the thought: ‘The recluse Gotama is content with any kind of almsfood and commends contentment with any kind of almsfood,’ then those disciples of mine who are almsfood eaters…should not honour, respect, revere, and venerate me for this quality, nor should they live in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me.
mn77:9.10 | S: Suppose my disciples were loyal to me because I’m content with any kind of lodging. Well, there are disciples of mine who stay at the root of a tree, in the open air. For eight months they don’t go under a roof. | T: “Suppose, Udāyin, my disciples honoured, respected, revered, and venerated me, and lived in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me, with the thought: ‘The recluse Gotama is content with any kind of resting place and commends contentment with any kind of resting place.’ Now there are disciples of mine who are tree-root dwellers and open-air dwellers, who do not use a roof for eight months of the year,
mn77:9.11 | S: But sometimes I even stay in bungalows, plastered inside and out, draft-free, with doors fastened and windows shuttered. | T: while I sometimes live in gabled mansions plastered within and without, protected against the wind, secured by door bolts, with shuttered windows.
mn77:9.12 | S: So if it were the case that my disciples are loyal to me because I’m content with any kind of lodging, then those disciples who stay at the root of a tree would not be loyal to me. | T: So if my disciples honoured me…with the thought: ‘The recluse Gotama is content with any kind of resting place and commends contentment with any kind of resting place,’ then those disciples of mine who are tree-root dwellers and open-air dwellers…should not honour, respect, revere, and venerate me for this quality, nor should they live in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me.
mn77:9.13 | S: Suppose my disciples were loyal to me because I’m secluded and I praise seclusion. Well, there are disciples of mine who live in the wilderness, in remote lodgings. Having ventured deep into remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest, they live there, coming down to the midst of the Saṅgha each fortnight for the recitation of the monastic code. | T: “Suppose, Udāyin, my disciples honoured, respected, revered, and venerated me, and lived in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me, with the thought: ‘The recluse Gotama is secluded and commends seclusion.’ Now there are disciples of mine who are forest dwellers, dwellers in remote resting places, who live withdrawn in remote jungle-thicket resting places and return to the midst of the Sangha once each half-month for the recitation of the Pātimokkha.
mn77:9.14 | S: But sometimes I live crowded by monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen; by rulers and their chief ministers, and monastics of other religions and their disciples. | T: But I sometimes live surrounded by bhikkhus and bhikkhunīs, by men and women lay followers, by kings and kings’ ministers, by other sectarians and their disciples.
mn77:9.15 | S: So if it were the case that my disciples are loyal to me because I’m secluded and praise seclusion, then those disciples who live in the wilderness would not be loyal to me. | T: So if my disciples honoured me…with the thought: ‘The recluse Gotama is secluded and commends seclusion,’ then those disciples of mine who are forest dwellers…should not honour, respect, revere, and venerate me for this quality, nor should they live in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me.
mn77:9.16 | S: So, Udāyī, it’s not because of these five qualities that my disciples honor, respect, revere, and venerate me; and honoring and respecting me, they remain loyal to me. | T: Thus, Udāyin, it is not because of these five qualities that my disciples honour, respect, revere, and venerate me, and live in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me.
mn77:10.1 | S: There are five other qualities because of which my disciples honor, respect, revere, and venerate me; and honoring and respecting me, they remain loyal to me. | T: “However, Udāyin, there are five other qualities because of which my disciples honour, respect, revere, and venerate me, and live in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me.
mn77:10.2 | S: What five? | T: What are the five?
mn77:10.3 | S: Firstly, my disciples esteem me for the higher ethics: | T: i. The Higher Virtue “Here, Udāyin, my disciples esteem me for the higher virtue thus:
mn77:10.4 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama is ethical. He possesses the entire spectrum of ethical conduct to the highest degree.’ | T: ‘The recluse Gotama is virtuous, he possesses the supreme aggregate of virtue.’
mn77:11.1 | S: Since this is so, | T: (none)
mn77:11.2 | S: this is the first quality because of which my disciples are loyal to me. | T: This is the first quality because of which my disciples honour, respect, revere, and venerate me, and live in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me.
mn77:12.1 | S: Furthermore, my disciples esteem me for my excellent knowledge and vision: | T: ii. Knowledge and Vision “Again, Udāyin, my disciples esteem me for my excellent knowledge and vision thus:
mn77:12.2 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama only claims to know when he does in fact know. | T: ‘When the recluse Gotama says “I know,” he truly knows;
mn77:12.3 | S: He only claims to see when he really does see. | T: when he says “I see,” he truly sees.
mn77:12.4 | S: He teaches based on direct knowledge, not without direct knowledge. | T: The recluse Gotama teaches the Dhamma through direct knowledge, not without direct knowledge;
mn77:12.5 | S: He teaches based on reason, not without reason. | T: he teaches the Dhamma with a sound basis, not without a sound basis;
mn77:12.6 | S: He teaches with a demonstrable basis, not without it.’ | T: he teaches the Dhamma in a convincing manner, not in an unconvincing manner.’
mn77:12.7 | S: Since this is so, | T: (none)
mn77:12.8 | P: ‘jānaṁyevāha samaṇo gotamo—jānāmīti, | T: (none)
mn77:12.9 | P: passaṁyevāha samaṇo gotamo—passāmīti; | T: (none)
mn77:12.10 | P: abhiññāya samaṇo gotamo dhammaṁ deseti no anabhiññāya; | T: (none)
mn77:12.11 | P: sanidānaṁ samaṇo gotamo dhammaṁ deseti no anidānaṁ; | T: (none)
mn77:12.12 | S: this is the second quality because of which my disciples are loyal to me. | T: This is the second quality because of which my disciples honour me…
mn77:13.1 | S: Furthermore, my disciples esteem me for my higher wisdom: | T: iii. The Higher Wisdom “Again, Udāyin, my disciples esteem me for the higher wisdom thus:
mn77:13.2 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama is wise. He possesses the entire spectrum of wisdom to the highest degree. | T: ‘The recluse Gotama is wise; he possesses the supreme aggregate of wisdom.
mn77:13.3 | S: It’s not possible that he would fail to foresee grounds for future criticism, or to legitimately and completely refute the doctrines of others that come up.’ | T: It is impossible that he should not foresee the implications of an assertion or that he should not be able to confute with reasons the current doctrines of others.’
mn77:13.4 | S: What do you think, Udāyī? | T: What do you think, Udāyin?
mn77:13.5 | S: Would my disciples, knowing and seeing this, break in and interrupt me?” | T: Would my disciples, knowing and seeing thus, break in and interrupt me?”—
mn77:13.6 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “No, venerable sir.”—
mn77:13.7 | S: “That’s because I don’t expect to be instructed by my disciples. | T: “I do not expect instruction from my disciples;
mn77:13.8 | S: Invariably, my disciples expect instruction from me. | T: invariably, it is my disciples who expect instruction from me.
mn77:13.9 | S: Since this is so, | T: (none)
mn77:13.10 | P: ‘paññavā samaṇo gotamo paramena paññākkhandhena samannāgato; | T: (none)
mn77:13.11 | P: taṁ vata anāgataṁ vādapathaṁ na dakkhati, uppannaṁ vā parappavādaṁ na sahadhammena niggahitaṁ niggaṇhissatīti— | T: (none)
mn77:13.12 | P: netaṁ ṭhānaṁ vijjati’. | T: (none)
mn77:13.13 | S: this is the third quality because of which my disciples are loyal to me. | T: This is the third quality because of which my disciples honour me…
mn77:14.1 | S: Furthermore, my disciples come to me and ask how the noble truth of suffering applies to the suffering in which they are swamped and mired. And I provide them with a satisfying answer to their question. | T: iv. The Four Noble Truths “Again, Udāyin, when my disciples have met with suffering and become victims of suffering, prey to suffering, they come to me and ask me about the noble truth of suffering. Being asked, I explain to them the noble truth of suffering, and I satisfy their minds with my explanation.
mn77:14.2 | S: They ask how the noble truths of the origin of suffering, | T: They ask me about the noble truth of the origin of suffering…
mn77:14.3 | S: the cessation of suffering, | T: about the noble truth of the cessation of suffering…
mn77:14.4 | S: and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering apply to the suffering  in which they are swamped and mired. And I provide them with satisfying answers to their questions. | T: about the noble truth of the way leading to the cessation of suffering. Being asked, I explain to them the noble truth of the way leading to the cessation of suffering, and I satisfy their minds with my explanation.
mn77:14.5 | S: Since this is so, | T: (none)
mn77:14.6 | P: Te maṁ dukkhasamudayaṁ … | T: (none)
mn77:14.7 | P: dukkhanirodhaṁ … | T: (none)
mn77:14.8 | P: dukkhanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadaṁ ariyasaccaṁ pucchanti. | T: (none)
mn77:14.9 | P: Tesāhaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminiṁ paṭipadaṁ ariyasaccaṁ puṭṭho byākaromi. | T: (none)
mn77:14.10 | P: Tesāhaṁ cittaṁ ārādhemi pañhassa veyyākaraṇena. | T: (none)
mn77:14.11 | S: this is the fourth quality because of which my disciples are loyal to me. | T: This is the fourth quality because of which my disciples honour me…
mn77:15.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. | T: V. The Way to Develop Wholesome States 1. The Four Foundations of Mindfulness “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the four foundations of mindfulness.
mn77:15.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. | T: Here a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
mn77:15.3 | S: They meditate observing an aspect of feelings … | T: He abides contemplating feelings as feelings…
mn77:15.4 | S: mind … | T: He abides contemplating mind as mind…
mn77:15.5 | S: principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. | T: He abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
mn77:15.6 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:16.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the four right efforts. | T: 2. The Four Right Kinds of Striving “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the four right kinds of striving.
mn77:16.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities don’t arise. | T: Here a bhikkhu awakens zeal for the non-arising of unarisen evil unwholesome states, and he makes effort, arouses energy, exerts his mind, and strives.
mn77:16.3 | S: They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up. | T: He awakens zeal for the abandoning of arisen evil unwholesome states…
mn77:16.4 | S: They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities arise. | T: He awakens zeal for the arising of unarisen wholesome states…
mn77:16.5 | S: They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are fully developed. | T: He awakens zeal for the continuance, non-disappearance, strengthening, increase, and fulfilment by development of arisen wholesome states, and he makes effort, arouses energy, exerts his mind, and strives.
mn77:16.6 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:17.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the four bases of psychic power. | T: 3. The Four Bases for Spiritual Power “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the four bases for spiritual power.
mn77:17.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort. | T: Here a bhikkhu develops the basis for spiritual power consisting in concentration due to zeal and determined striving.
mn77:17.3 | S: They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy, and active effort. | T: He develops the basis for spiritual power consisting in concentration due to energy and determined striving.
mn77:17.4 | S: They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to mental development, and active effort. | T: He develops the basis for spiritual power consisting in concentration due to purity of mind and determined striving.
mn77:17.5 | S: They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to inquiry, and active effort. | T: He develops the basis for spiritual power consisting in concentration due to investigation and determined striving.
mn77:17.6 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:18.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the five faculties. | T: 4. The Five Faculties “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the five spiritual faculties.
mn77:18.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant develops the faculties of faith, | T: Here a bhikkhu develops the faculty of faith, which leads to peace, leads to enlightenment.
mn77:18.3 | S: energy, | T: He develops the faculty of energy…
mn77:18.4 | S: mindfulness, | T: the faculty of mindfulness…
mn77:18.5 | S: immersion, | T: the faculty of concentration…the faculty of wisdom,
mn77:18.6 | S: and wisdom, which lead to peace and awakening. | T: which leads to peace, leads to enlightenment.
mn77:18.7 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:19.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the five powers. | T: 5. The Five Powers “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the five powers.
mn77:19.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant develops the powers of faith, | T: Here a bhikkhu develops the power of faith, which leads to peace, leads to enlightenment.
mn77:19.3 | S: energy, | T: He develops the power of energy…
mn77:19.4 | S: mindfulness, | T: the power of mindfulness…
mn77:19.5 | S: immersion, | T: the power of concentration…
mn77:19.6 | S: and wisdom, which lead to peace and awakening. | T: the power of wisdom, which leads to peace, leads to enlightenment.
mn77:19.7 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:20.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the seven awakening factors. | T: 6. The Seven Enlightenment Factors “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the seven enlightenment factors.
mn77:20.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, | T: Here a bhikkhu develops the mindfulness enlightenment factor, which is supported by seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, and results in relinquishment.
mn77:20.3 | S: investigation of principles, | T: He develops the investigation-of-states enlightenment factor…
mn77:20.4 | S: energy, | T: the energy enlightenment factor…the rapture enlightenment factor…
mn77:20.5 | S: rapture, | T: (none)
mn77:20.6 | S: tranquility, | T: the tranquillity enlightenment factor…
mn77:20.7 | S: immersion, | T: the concentration enlightenment factor…
mn77:20.8 | S: and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. | T: the equanimity enlightenment factor, which is supported by seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, and results in relinquishment.
mn77:20.9 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:21.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the noble eightfold path. | T: 7. The Noble Eightfold Path “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the Noble Eightfold Path.
mn77:21.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant develops right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. | T: Here a bhikkhu develops right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
mn77:21.3 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:22.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the eight liberations. | T: 8. The Eight Liberations “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the eight liberations.
mn77:22.2 | S: Having physical form, they see forms. | T: Possessed of material form, one sees forms:
mn77:22.3 | S: This is the first liberation. | T: this is the first liberation.
mn77:22.4 | S: Not perceiving form internally, they see forms externally. | T: Not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally:
mn77:22.5 | S: This is the second liberation. | T: this is the second liberation.
mn77:22.6 | S: They’re focused only on beauty. | T: One is resolved only upon the beautiful:
mn77:22.7 | S: This is the third liberation. | T: this is the third liberation.
mn77:22.8 | S: Going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite’, they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite space. | T: With the complete surmounting of perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of sensory impact, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite,’ one enters upon and abides in the base of infinite space:
mn77:22.9 | S: This is the fourth liberation. | T: this is the fourth liberation.
mn77:22.10 | S: Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite’, they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite consciousness. | T: By completely surmounting the base of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite,’ one enters upon and abides in the base of infinite consciousness:
mn77:22.11 | S: This is the fifth liberation. | T: this is the fifth liberation.
mn77:22.12 | S: Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing at all’, they enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness. | T: By completely surmounting the base of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing,’ one enters upon and abides in the base of nothingness:
mn77:22.13 | S: This is the sixth liberation. | T: this is the sixth liberation.
mn77:22.14 | S: Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. | T: By completely surmounting the base of nothingness, one enters upon and abides in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception:
mn77:22.15 | S: This is the seventh liberation. | T: this is the seventh liberation.
mn77:22.16 | S: Going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception and feeling. | T: By completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, one enters upon and abides in the cessation of perception and feeling:
mn77:22.17 | S: This is the eighth liberation. | T: this is the eighth liberation.
mn77:22.18 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:23.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the eight dimensions of mastery. | T: 9. The Eight Bases for Transcendence “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the eight bases for transcendence.
mn77:23.2 | S: Perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limited, both pretty and ugly. | T: Perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally, limited, fair and ugly;
mn77:23.3 | S: Mastering them, they perceive: ‘I know and see.’ | T: by transcending them, one perceives thus: ‘I know, I see.’
mn77:23.4 | S: This is the first dimension of mastery. | T: This is the first base for transcendence .
mn77:23.5 | S: Perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limitless, both pretty and ugly. | T: Perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally, immeasurable, fair and ugly;
mn77:23.6 | S: Mastering them, they perceive: ‘I know and see.’ | T: by transcending them, one perceives thus: ‘I know, I see.’
mn77:23.7 | S: This is the second dimension of mastery. | T: This is the second base for transcendence.
mn77:23.8 | S: Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limited, both pretty and ugly. | T: Not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally, limited, fair and ugly;
mn77:23.9 | S: Mastering them, they perceive: ‘I know and see.’ | T: by transcending them, one perceives thus: ‘I know, I see.’
mn77:23.10 | S: This is the third dimension of mastery. | T: This is the third base for transcendence .
mn77:23.11 | S: Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limitless, both pretty and ugly. | T: Not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally, immeasurable, fair and ugly;
mn77:23.12 | S: Mastering them, they perceive: ‘I know and see.’ | T: by transcending them, one perceives thus: ‘I know, I see.’
mn77:23.13 | S: This is the fourth dimension of mastery. | T: This is the fourth base for transcendence.
mn77:23.14 | S: Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, blue, with blue color and blue appearance. | T: Not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally, blue, of blue colour, blue in appearance, with blue luminosity.
mn77:23.15 | S: They’re like a flax flower that’s blue, with blue color and blue appearance. Or a cloth from Varanasi that’s smoothed on both sides, blue, with blue color and blue appearance. | T: Just like a flax flower, which is blue, of blue colour, blue in appearance, with blue luminosity, or just like Benares cloth smoothened on both sides, which is blue, of blue colour, blue in appearance, with blue luminosity;
mn77:23.16 | S: In the same way, not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, blue, with blue color and blue appearance. | T: so too, not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally…with blue luminosity;
mn77:23.17 | S: Mastering them, they perceive: ‘I know and see.’ | T: by transcending them, one perceives thus: ‘I know, I see.’
mn77:23.18 | S: This is the fifth dimension of mastery. | T: This is the fifth base for transcendence.
mn77:23.19 | S: Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance. | T: Not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally, yellow, of yellow colour, yellow in appearance, with yellow luminosity.
mn77:23.20 | S: They’re like a champak flower that’s yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance. Or a cloth from Varanasi that’s smoothed on both sides, yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance. | T: Just like a kaṇṇikāra flower, which is yellow, of yellow colour, yellow in appearance, with yellow luminosity, or just like Benares cloth smoothened on both sides, which is yellow, of yellow colour, yellow in appearance, with yellow luminosity;
mn77:23.21 | S: In the same way, not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance. | T: so too, not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally…with yellow luminosity;
mn77:23.22 | S: Mastering them, they perceive: ‘I know and see.’ | T: by transcending them, one perceives thus: ‘I know, I see.’
mn77:23.23 | S: This is the sixth dimension of mastery. | T: This is the sixth base for transcendence.
mn77:23.24 | S: Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are red, with red color and red appearance. | T: Not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally, red, of red colour, red in appearance, with red luminosity.
mn77:23.25 | S: They’re like a scarlet mallow flower that’s red, with red color and red appearance. Or a cloth from Varanasi that’s smoothed on both sides, red, with red color and red appearance. | T: Just like a hibiscus flower, which is red, of red colour, red in appearance, with red luminosity, or just like Benares cloth smoothened on both sides, which is red, of red colour, red in appearance, with red luminosity;
mn77:23.26 | S: In the same way, not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are red, with red color and red appearance. | T: so too, not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally…with red luminosity;
mn77:23.27 | S: Mastering them, they perceive: ‘I know and see.’ | T: by transcending them, one perceives thus: ‘I know, I see.’
mn77:23.28 | S: This is the seventh dimension of mastery. | T: This is the seventh base for transcendence.
mn77:23.29 | S: Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are white, with white color and white appearance. | T: Not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally, white, of white colour, white in appearance, with white luminosity.
mn77:23.30 | S: They’re like the morning star that’s white, with white color and white appearance. Or a cloth from Varanasi that’s smoothed on both sides, white, with white color and white appearance. | T: Just like the morning star, which is white, of white colour, white in appearance, with white luminosity, or just like Benares cloth smoothened on both sides, which is white, of white colour, white in appearance, with white luminosity;
mn77:23.31 | S: In the same way, not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are white, with white color and white appearance. | T: so too, not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally…with white luminosity;
mn77:23.32 | S: Mastering them, they perceive: ‘I know and see.’ | T: by transcending them, one perceives thus: ‘I know, I see.’
mn77:23.33 | S: This is the eighth dimension of mastery. | T: This is the eighth base for transcendence.
mn77:23.34 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:24.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the ten universal dimensions of meditation. | T: 10. The Ten Kasiṇas “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the ten kasiṇa bases.
mn77:24.2 | S: Someone perceives the meditation on universal earth above, below, across, undivided and limitless. | T: One contemplates the earthkasiṇa above, below, and across, undivided and immeasurable.
mn77:24.3 | S: They perceive the meditation on universal water … | T: Another contemplates the water-kasiṇa…Another contemplates the fire-kasiṇa…
mn77:24.4 | S: the meditation on universal fire … | T: (none)
mn77:24.5 | S: the meditation on universal air … | T: Another contemplates the air-kasiṇa…
mn77:24.6 | S: the meditation on universal blue … | T: Another contemplates the blue-kasiṇa…
mn77:24.7 | S: the meditation on universal yellow … | T: Another contemplates the yellow-kasiṇa…
mn77:24.8 | S: the meditation on universal red … | T: Another contemplates the red-kasiṇa…
mn77:24.9 | S: the meditation on universal white … | T: Another contemplates the white-kasiṇa…
mn77:24.10 | S: the meditation on universal space … | T: Another contemplates the space-kasiṇa…
mn77:24.11 | S: the meditation on universal consciousness above, below, across, undivided and limitless. | T: Another contemplates the consciousness-kasiṇa above, below, and across, undivided and immeasurable.
mn77:24.12 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the perfection and consummation of direct knowledge.
mn77:25.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the four absorptions. | T: 11. The Four Jhānas “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the four jhānas.
mn77:25.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: Here, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
mn77:25.3 | S: They drench, steep, fill, and spread themselves with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. | T: He makes the rapture and pleasure born of seclusion drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
mn77:25.4 | S: It’s like when a deft bathroom attendant or their apprentice pours bath powder into a bronze dish, sprinkling it little by little with water. They knead it until the ball of bath powder is soaked and saturated with moisture, spread through inside and out; yet no moisture oozes out. | T: Just as a skilled bath man or a bath man’s apprentice heaps bath powder in a metal basin and, sprinkling it gradually with water, kneads it till the moisture wets his ball of bath powder, soaks it and pervades it inside and out, yet the ball itself does not ooze;
mn77:25.5 | S: In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads themselves with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. | T: so too, a bhikkhu makes the rapture and pleasure born of seclusion drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
mn77:26.1 | S: Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: “Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second jhāna, which has self-confidence and singleness of mind without applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of concentration.
mn77:26.2 | S: They drench, steep, fill, and spread themselves with rapture and bliss born of immersion. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with rapture and bliss born of immersion. | T: He makes the rapture and pleasure born of concentration drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the rapture and pleasure born of concentration.
mn77:26.3 | S: It’s like a deep lake fed by spring water. There’s no inlet to the east, west, north, or south, and the heavens would not properly bestow showers from time to time. | T: Just as though there were a lake whose waters welled up from below and it had no inflow from east, west, north, or south and would not be replenished from time to time by showers of rain,
mn77:26.4 | S: But the stream of cool water welling up in the lake drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads throughout the lake. There’s no part of the lake that’s not spread through with cool water. | T: then the cool fount of water welling up in the lake would make the cool water drench, steep, fill, and pervade the lake, so that there would be no part of the whole lake unpervaded by cool water;
mn77:26.5 | S: In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads themselves with rapture and bliss born of immersion. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with rapture and bliss born of immersion. | T: so too, a bhikkhu makes the rapture and pleasure born of concentration drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the rapture and pleasure born of concentration.
mn77:27.1 | S: Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and remains in the third absorption. They meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, experiencing for themselves the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’ | T: “Again, with the fading away as well of rapture, a bhikkhu abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in the third jhāna, on account of which noble ones announce: ‘He has a pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.’
mn77:27.2 | S: They drench, steep, fill, and spread themselves with bliss free of rapture. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with bliss free of rapture. | T: He makes the pleasure divested of rapture drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the pleasure divested of rapture.
mn77:27.3 | S: It’s like a pool with blue water lilies, or pink or white lotuses. Some of them sprout and grow in the water without rising above it, thriving underwater. From the tip to the root they’re drenched, steeped, filled, and soaked with cool water. There’s no part of them that’s not soaked with cool water. | T: Just as in a pond of blue or red or white lotuses, some lotuses that are born and grow in the water thrive immersed in the water without rising out of it, and cool water drenches, steeps, fills, and pervades them to their tips and their roots, so that there is no part of all those lotuses unpervaded by cool water;
