## mn29
mn29:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
mn29:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain, not long after Devadatta had left. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Rājagaha on the mountain Vulture Peak; it was soon after Devadatta had left.
mn29:1.3 | S: There the Buddha spoke to the mendicants about Devadatta: | T: There, referring to Devadatta, the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus:
mn29:2.1 | S: “Mendicants, take the case of a gentleman who has gone forth out of faith from the lay life to homelessness, thinking, | T: “Bhikkhus, here some clansman goes forth out of faith from the home life into homelessness, considering:
mn29:2.2 | S: ‘I’m swamped by rebirth, old age, and death; by sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. I’m swamped by suffering, mired in suffering. | T: ‘I am a victim of birth, ageing, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair; I am a victim of suffering, a prey to suffering.
mn29:2.3 | S: Hopefully I can make an end to this entire mass of suffering.’ | T: Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known.’
mn29:2.4 | S: When they’ve gone forth they generate possessions, honor, and popularity. | T: When he has gone forth thus, he acquires gain, honour, and renown.
mn29:2.5 | S: They’re happy with that, and they’ve got all they wished for. | T: He is pleased with that gain, honour, and renown, and his intention is fulfilled.
mn29:2.6 | S: And they glorify themselves and put others down because of that: | T: On account of it he lauds himself and disparages others thus:
mn29:2.7 | S: ‘I’m the one with possessions, honor, and popularity. These other mendicants are obscure and insignificant.’ | T: ‘I am one who gets gain and renown, but these other bhikkhus are unknown, of no account.’
mn29:2.8 | S: And so they become indulgent and fall into negligence on account of those possessions, honor, and popularity. And being negligent they live in suffering. | T: He becomes intoxicated with that gain, honour, and renown, grows negligent, falls into negligence, and being negligent, he lives in suffering.
mn29:2.9 | S: Suppose there was a person in need of heartwood. And while wandering in search of heartwood he’d come across a large tree standing with heartwood. But, passing over the heartwood, softwood, bark, and shoots, he’d cut off the branches and leaves and leave imagining they were heartwood. | T: “Suppose a man needing heartwood, seeking heartwood, wandering in search of heartwood, came to a great tree standing possessed of heartwood. Passing over its heartwood, its sapwood, its inner bark, and its outer bark, he would cut off its twigs and leaves and take them away thinking they were heartwood.
mn29:2.10 | S: If a person with clear eyes saw him they’d say, | T: Then a man with good sight, seeing him, might say:
mn29:2.11 | S: ‘This gentleman doesn’t know what heartwood, softwood, bark, shoots, or branches and leaves are. | T: ‘This good man did not know the heartwood, the sapwood, the inner bark, the outer bark, or the twigs and leaves.
mn29:2.12 | S: That’s why he passed them over, cut off the branches and leaves, and left imagining they were heartwood. | T: Thus, while needing heartwood, seeking heartwood, wandering in search of heartwood, he came to a great tree standing possessed of heartwood, and passing over its heartwood, its sapwood, its inner bark, and its outer bark, he cut off its twigs and leaves and took them away thinking they were heartwood.
mn29:2.13 | S: Whatever he needs to make from heartwood, he won’t succeed.’ … | T: Whatever it was this good man had to make with heartwood, his purpose will not be served.’
mn29:2.14 | P: Evameva kho, bhikkhave, idhekacco kulaputto saddhā agārasmā anagāriyaṁ pabbajito hoti: | T: So too, bhikkhus, here some clansman goes forth out of faith…
mn29:2.15 | P: ‘otiṇṇomhi jātiyā jarāya maraṇena sokehi paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upāyāsehi, dukkhotiṇṇo dukkhapareto, | T: (none)
mn29:2.16 | P: appeva nāma imassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa antakiriyā paññāyethā’ti. | T: (none)
mn29:2.17 | P: So evaṁ pabbajito samāno lābhasakkārasilokaṁ abhinibbatteti. | T: (none)
mn29:2.18 | P: So tena lābhasakkārasilokena attamano hoti paripuṇṇasaṅkappo. | T: (none)
mn29:2.19 | P: So tena lābhasakkārasilokena attānukkaṁseti, paraṁ vambheti ‘ahamasmi lābhasakkārasilokavā, ime panaññe bhikkhū appaññātā appesakkhā’ti. | T: (none)
mn29:2.20 | P: So tena lābhasakkārasilokena majjati pamajjati pamādaṁ āpajjati, pamatto samāno dukkhaṁ viharati. | T: …he lives in suffering.
mn29:2.21 | S: This is called a mendicant who has grabbed the branches and leaves of the spiritual life | T: This bhikkhu is called one who has taken the twigs and leaves of the holy life and stopped short with that.
mn29:2.22 | S: and stopped short with that. | T: (none)
mn29:3.1 | S: Next, take a gentleman who has gone forth out of faith from the lay life to homelessness … | T: “Here, bhikkhus, some clansman goes forth out of faith from the home life into homelessness, considering:
mn29:3.2 | P: ‘otiṇṇomhi jātiyā jarāya maraṇena sokehi paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upāyāsehi, dukkhotiṇṇo dukkhapareto, | T: ‘I am a victim of birth, ageing, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair; I am a victim of suffering, a prey to suffering.
mn29:3.3 | P: appeva nāma imassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa antakiriyā paññāyethā’ti. | T: Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known.’
mn29:3.4 | S: When they’ve gone forth they generate possessions, honor, and popularity. | T: When he has gone forth thus, he acquires gain, honour, and renown.
mn29:3.5 | S: They’re not happy with that, and haven’t got all they wished for. | T: He is not pleased with that gain, honour, and renown, and his intention is not fulfilled.
mn29:3.6 | S: They don’t glorify themselves and put others down on account of that. | T: He does not, on account of it, laud himself and disparage others.
mn29:3.7 | S: Nor do they become indulgent and fall into negligence on account of those possessions, honor, and popularity. | T: He does not become intoxicated with that gain, honour, and renown; he does not grow negligent and fall into negligence.
mn29:3.8 | S: Being diligent, they achieve accomplishment in ethics. | T: Being diligent, he achieves the attainment of virtue.
mn29:3.9 | S: They’re happy with that, and they’ve got all they wished for. | T: He is pleased with that attainment of virtue and his intention is fulfilled.
mn29:3.10 | S: And they glorify themselves and put others down on account of that: | T: On account of it he lauds himself and disparages others thus:
mn29:3.11 | S: ‘I’m the one who is ethical, of good character. These other mendicants are unethical, of bad character.’ | T: ‘I am virtuous, of good character, but these other bhikkhus are immoral, of evil character.’
mn29:3.12 | S: And so they become indulgent and fall into negligence regarding their accomplishment in ethics. And being negligent they live in suffering. | T: He becomes intoxicated with that attainment of virtue, grows negligent, falls into negligence, and being negligent, he lives in suffering.
mn29:3.13 | S: Suppose there was a person in need of heartwood. And while wandering in search of heartwood he’d come across a large tree standing with heartwood. But, passing over the heartwood, softwood, and bark, he’d cut off the shoots and leave imagining they were heartwood. | T: “Suppose a man needing heartwood, seeking heartwood, wandering in search of heartwood, came to a great tree standing possessed of heartwood. Passing over its heartwood, its sapwood, and its inner bark, he would cut off its outer bark and take it away thinking it was heartwood.
mn29:3.14 | S: If a person with clear eyes saw him they’d say, | T: Then a man with good sight, seeing him, might say:
mn29:3.15 | S: ‘This gentleman doesn’t know what heartwood, softwood, bark, shoots, or branches and leaves are. | T: ‘This good man did not know the heartwood…or the twigs and leaves.
mn29:3.16 | S: That’s why he passed them over, cut off the shoots, and left imagining they were heartwood. | T: Thus, while needing heartwood…he cut off its outer bark and took it away thinking it was heartwood.
mn29:3.17 | S: Whatever he needs to make from heartwood, he won’t succeed.’ … | T: Whatever it was this good man had to make with heartwood, his purpose will not be served.’
mn29:4.1 | P: Evameva kho, bhikkhave, idhekacco kulaputto saddhā agārasmā anagāriyaṁ pabbajito hoti: | T: So too, bhikkhus, here some clansman goes forth out of faith…he lives in suffering.
mn29:4.2 | P: ‘otiṇṇomhi jātiyā jarāya maraṇena sokehi paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upāyāsehi, dukkhotiṇṇo dukkhapareto, | T: (none)
mn29:4.3 | P: appeva nāma imassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa antakiriyā paññāyethā’ti. | T: (none)
mn29:4.4 | P: So evaṁ pabbajito samāno lābhasakkārasilokaṁ abhinibbatteti. | T: (none)
mn29:4.5 | P: So tena lābhasakkārasilokena na attamano hoti na paripuṇṇasaṅkappo. | T: (none)
mn29:4.6 | P: So tena lābhasakkārasilokena na attānukkaṁseti, na paraṁ vambheti. | T: (none)
mn29:4.7 | P: So tena lābhasakkārasilokena na majjati nappamajjati na pamādaṁ āpajjati. | T: (none)
mn29:4.8 | P: Appamatto samāno sīlasampadaṁ ārādheti. | T: (none)
mn29:4.9 | P: So tāya sīlasampadāya attamano hoti paripuṇṇasaṅkappo. | T: (none)
mn29:4.10 | P: So tāya sīlasampadāya attānukkaṁseti, paraṁ vambheti: | T: (none)
mn29:4.11 | P: ‘ahamasmi sīlavā kalyāṇadhammo, ime panaññe bhikkhū dussīlā pāpadhammā’ti. | T: (none)
mn29:4.12 | P: So tāya sīlasampadāya majjati pamajjati pamādaṁ āpajjati, pamatto samāno dukkhaṁ viharati. | T: (none)
mn29:4.13 | S: This is called a mendicant who has grabbed the shoots of the spiritual life | T: This bhikkhu is called one who has taken the outer bark of the holy life and stopped short with that.
mn29:4.14 | S: and stopped short with that. | T: (none)
mn29:4.15 | S: Next, take a gentleman who has gone forth out of faith from the lay life to homelessness … | T: “Here, bhikkhus, some clansman goes forth out of faith from the home life into homelessness, considering:
mn29:4.16 | P: ‘otiṇṇomhi jātiyā jarāya maraṇena sokehi paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upāyāsehi, dukkhotiṇṇo dukkhapareto, | T: ‘I am a victim of birth, ageing, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair; I am a victim of suffering, a prey to suffering.
mn29:4.17 | P: appeva nāma imassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa antakiriyā paññāyethā’ti. | T: Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known.’
mn29:4.18 | S: When they’ve gone forth they generate possessions, honor, and popularity. … | T: When he has gone forth thus, he acquires gain, honour, and renown.
mn29:4.19 | P: So tena lābhasakkārasilokena na attamano hoti na paripuṇṇasaṅkappo. | T: He is not pleased with that gain, honour, and renown, and his intention is not fulfilled…
mn29:4.20 | P: So tena lābhasakkārasilokena na attānukkaṁseti, na paraṁ vambheti. | T: (none)
mn29:4.21 | P: So tena lābhasakkārasilokena na majjati nappamajjati na pamādaṁ āpajjati, appamatto samāno sīlasampadaṁ ārādheti. | T: Being diligent, he achieves the attainment of virtue.
mn29:4.22 | P: So tāya sīlasampadāya attamano hoti no ca kho paripuṇṇasaṅkappo. | T: He is pleased with that attainment of virtue, but his intention is not fulfilled.
mn29:4.23 | P: So tāya sīlasampadāya na attānukkaṁseti, na paraṁ vambheti. | T: He does not, on account of it, laud himself and disparage others.
mn29:4.24 | P: So tāya sīlasampadāya na majjati nappamajjati na pamādaṁ āpajjati. | T: He does not become intoxicated with that attainment of virtue; he does not grow negligent and fall into negligence.
mn29:4.25 | S: Being diligent, they achieve accomplishment in immersion. | T: Being diligent, he achieves the attainment of concentration.
mn29:4.26 | S: They’re happy with that, and they’ve got all they wished for. | T: He is pleased with that attainment of concentration and his intention is fulfilled.
mn29:4.27 | S: And they glorify themselves and put others down on account of that: | T: On account of it he lauds himself and disparages others thus:
mn29:4.28 | S: ‘I’m the one with immersion and unified mind. These other mendicants lack immersion, they have straying minds.’ | T: ‘I am concentrated, my mind is unified, but these other bhikkhus are unconcentrated, with their minds astray.’
mn29:4.29 | S: And so they become indulgent and fall into negligence regarding that accomplishment in immersion. And being negligent they live in suffering. | T: He becomes intoxicated with that attainment of concentration, grows negligent, falls into negligence, and being negligent, he lives in suffering.
mn29:4.30 | S: Suppose there was a person in need of heartwood. And while wandering in search of heartwood he’d come across a large tree standing with heartwood. But, passing over the heartwood and softwood, he’d cut off the bark and leave imagining it was heartwood. | T: “Suppose a man needing heartwood, seeking heartwood, wandering in search of heartwood, came to a great tree standing possessed of heartwood. Passing over its heartwood and its sapwood, he would cut off its inner bark and take it away thinking it was heartwood.
mn29:4.31 | S: If a person with clear eyes saw him they’d say: ‘This gentleman doesn’t know what heartwood, softwood, bark, shoots, or branches and leaves are. | T: Then a man with good sight, seeing him, might say: ‘This good man did not know the heartwood…or the twigs and leaves.
mn29:4.32 | S: That’s why he passed them over, cut off the bark, and left imagining it was heartwood. | T: Thus, while needing heartwood…he cut off its inner bark and took it away thinking it was hear twood.
mn29:4.33 | S: Whatever he needs to make from heartwood, he won’t succeed.’ … | T: Whatever it was this good man had to make with heartwood, his purpose will not be served.’
mn29:4.34 | P: Evameva kho, bhikkhave, idhekacco kulaputto saddhā agārasmā anagāriyaṁ pabbajito hoti: | T: So too, bhikkhus, here some clansman goes forth out of faith…he lives in suffering.
mn29:4.35 | P: ‘otiṇṇomhi jātiyā jarāya maraṇena sokehi paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upāyāsehi, dukkhotiṇṇo dukkhapareto, | T: (none)
mn29:4.36 | P: appeva nāma imassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa antakiriyā paññāyethā’ti. | T: (none)
mn29:4.37 | P: So evaṁ pabbajito samāno lābhasakkārasilokaṁ abhinibbatteti. | T: (none)
mn29:4.38 | P: So tena lābhasakkārasilokena na attamano hoti na paripuṇṇasaṅkappo. | T: (none)
mn29:4.39 | P: So tena lābhasakkārasilokena na attānukkaṁseti, na paraṁ vambheti. | T: (none)
mn29:4.40 | P: So tena lābhasakkārasilokena na majjati nappamajjati na pamādaṁ āpajjati, appamatto samāno sīlasampadaṁ ārādheti. | T: (none)
mn29:4.41 | P: So tāya sīlasampadāya attamano hoti no ca kho paripuṇṇasaṅkappo. | T: (none)
mn29:4.42 | P: So tāya sīlasampadāya na attānukkaṁseti, na paraṁ vambheti. | T: (none)
mn29:4.43 | P: So tāya sīlasampadāya na majjati nappamajjati na pamādaṁ āpajjati, appamatto samāno samādhisampadaṁ ārādheti. | T: (none)
mn29:4.44 | P: So tāya samādhisampadāya attamano hoti paripuṇṇasaṅkappo. | T: (none)
mn29:4.45 | P: So tāya samādhisampadāya attānukkaṁseti, paraṁ vambheti: | T: (none)
mn29:4.46 | P: ‘ahamasmi samāhito ekaggacitto, ime panaññe bhikkhū asamāhitā vibbhantacittā’ti. | T: (none)
mn29:4.47 | P: So tāya samādhisampadāya majjati pamajjati pamādaṁ āpajjati, pamatto samāno dukkhaṁ viharati. | T: (none)
mn29:4.48 | S: This is called a mendicant who has grabbed the bark of the spiritual life | T: This bhikkhu is called one who has taken the inner bark of the holy life and stopped short with that.
mn29:4.49 | S: and stopped short with that. | T: (none)
mn29:5.1 | S: Next, take a gentleman who has gone forth out of faith from the lay life to homelessness … | T: “Here, bhikkhus, some clansman goes forth out of faith from the home life into homelessness, considering:
mn29:5.2 | P: ‘otiṇṇomhi jātiyā jarāya maraṇena sokehi paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upāyāsehi, dukkhotiṇṇo dukkhapareto, | T: ‘I am a victim of birth, ageing, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair; I am a victim of suffering, a prey to suffering.
mn29:5.3 | P: appeva nāma imassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa antakiriyā paññāyethā’ti. | T: Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known.’
mn29:5.4 | S: When they’ve gone forth they generate possessions, honor, and popularity. … | T: When he has gone forth thus, he acquires gain, honour, and renown.
mn29:5.5 | P: So tena lābhasakkārasilokena na attamano hoti na paripuṇṇasaṅkappo. | T: He is not pleased with that gain, honour, and renown, and his intention is not fulfilled…
mn29:5.6 | P: So tena lābhasakkārasilokena na attānukkaṁseti, na paraṁ vambheti. | T: (none)
mn29:5.7 | P: So tena lābhasakkārasilokena na majjati nappamajjati na pamādaṁ āpajjati. | T: (none)
mn29:5.8 | P: Appamatto samāno sīlasampadaṁ ārādheti. | T: Being diligent, he achieves the attainment of virtue.
mn29:5.9 | P: So tāya sīlasampadāya attamano hoti, no ca kho paripuṇṇasaṅkappo. | T: He is pleased with that attainment of virtue, but his intention is not fulfilled…
mn29:5.10 | P: So tāya sīlasampadāya na attānukkaṁseti, na paraṁ vambheti. | T: (none)
mn29:5.11 | P: So tāya sīlasampadāya na majjati nappamajjati na pamādaṁ āpajjati, appamatto samāno samādhisampadaṁ ārādheti. | T: Being diligent, he achieves the attainment of concentration.
mn29:5.12 | P: So tāya samādhisampadāya attamano hoti, no ca kho paripuṇṇasaṅkappo. | T: He is pleased with that attainment of concentration, but his intention is not fulfilled.
mn29:5.13 | P: So tāya samādhisampadāya na attānukkaṁseti, na paraṁ vambheti. | T: He does not, on account of it, laud himself and disparage others.
mn29:5.14 | S: Being diligent, they achieve knowledge and vision. | T: He does not become intoxicated with that attainment of concentration; he does not grow negligent and fall into negligence. Being diligent, he achieves knowledge and vision.
mn29:5.15 | S: They’re happy with that, and they’ve got all they wished for. | T: He is pleased with that knowledge and vision and his intention is fulfilled.
mn29:5.16 | S: And they glorify themselves and put others down on account of that, | T: On account of it he lauds himself and disparages others thus:
mn29:5.17 | S: ‘I’m the one who meditates knowing and seeing. | T: ‘I live knowing and seeing,
mn29:5.18 | S: These other mendicants meditate without knowing and seeing.’ | T: but these other bhikkhus live unknowing and unseeing.’
mn29:5.19 | S: And so they become indulgent and fall into negligence regarding that knowledge and vision. And being negligent they live in suffering. | T: He becomes intoxicated with that knowledge and vision, grows negligent, falls into negligence, and being negligent, he lives in suffering.
mn29:5.20 | S: Suppose there was a person in need of heartwood. And while wandering in search of heartwood he’d come across a large tree standing with heartwood. But, passing over the heartwood, he’d cut out the softwood and leave imagining it was heartwood. | T: “Suppose a man needing heartwood, seeking heartwood, wandering in search of heartwood, came to a great tree standing possessed of heartwood. Passing over its heartwood, he would cut off its sapwood and take it away thinking it was heartwood.
mn29:5.21 | S: If a person with clear eyes saw him they’d say, | T: Then a man with good sight, seeing him, might say:
mn29:5.22 | S: ‘This gentleman doesn’t know what heartwood, softwood, bark, shoots, or branches and leaves are. | T: ‘This good man did not know the heartwood…or the twigs and leaves.
mn29:5.23 | S: That’s why he passed them over, cut out the softwood, and left imagining it was heartwood. | T: Thus, while needing heartwood…he cut off its sapwood and took it away thinking it was heartwood.
mn29:5.24 | S: Whatever he needs to make from heartwood, he won’t succeed.’ … | T: Whatever it was this good man had to make with heartwood, his purpose will not be served.’
mn29:5.25 | P: Evameva kho, bhikkhave, idhekacco kulaputto saddhā agārasmā anagāriyaṁ pabbajito hoti: | T: So too, bhikkhus, here some clansman goes forth out of faith…he lives in suffering.
mn29:5.26 | P: ‘otiṇṇomhi jātiyā jarāya maraṇena sokehi paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upāyāsehi, dukkhotiṇṇo dukkhapareto, | T: (none)
mn29:5.27 | P: appeva nāma imassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa antakiriyā paññāyethā’ti. | T: (none)
mn29:5.28 | P: So evaṁ pabbajito samāno lābhasakkārasilokaṁ abhinibbatteti. | T: (none)
mn29:5.29 | P: So tena lābhasakkārasilokena na attamano hoti na paripuṇṇasaṅkappo. | T: (none)
mn29:5.30 | P: So tena lābhasakkārasilokena na attānukkaṁseti, na paraṁ vambheti. | T: (none)
mn29:5.31 | P: So tena lābhasakkārasilokena na majjati nappamajjati na pamādaṁ āpajjati, appamatto samāno sīlasampadaṁ ārādheti. | T: (none)
mn29:5.32 | P: So tāya sīlasampadāya attamano hoti, no ca kho paripuṇṇasaṅkappo. | T: (none)
mn29:5.33 | P: So tāya sīlasampadāya na attānukkaṁseti, na paraṁ vambheti. | T: (none)
mn29:5.34 | P: So tāya sīlasampadāya na majjati nappamajjati na pamādaṁ āpajjati, appamatto samāno samādhisampadaṁ ārādheti. | T: (none)
mn29:5.35 | P: So tāya samādhisampadāya attamano hoti, no ca kho paripuṇṇasaṅkappo. | T: (none)
mn29:5.36 | P: So tāya samādhisampadāya na attānukkaṁseti, na paraṁ vambheti. | T: (none)
mn29:5.37 | P: So tāya samādhisampadāya na majjati nappamajjati na pamādaṁ āpajjati, appamatto samāno ñāṇadassanaṁ ārādheti. | T: (none)
mn29:5.38 | P: So tena ñāṇadassanena attamano hoti paripuṇṇasaṅkappo. | T: (none)
mn29:5.39 | P: So tena ñāṇadassanena attānukkaṁseti, paraṁ vambheti: | T: (none)
mn29:5.40 | P: ‘ahamasmi jānaṁ passaṁ viharāmi, ime panaññe bhikkhū ajānaṁ apassaṁ viharantī’ti. | T: (none)
mn29:5.41 | P: So tena ñāṇadassanena majjati pamajjati pamādaṁ āpajjati, pamatto samāno dukkhaṁ viharati. | T: (none)
mn29:5.42 | S: This is called a mendicant who has grabbed the softwood of the spiritual life | T: This bhikkhu is called one who has taken the sapwood of the holy life and stopped short with that.
mn29:5.43 | S: and stopped short with that. | T: (none)
mn29:6.1 | S: Next, take a gentleman who has gone forth out of faith from the lay life to homelessness, thinking, | T: “Here, bhikkhus, some clansman goes forth out of faith from the home life into homelessness, considering:
mn29:6.2 | S: ‘I’m swamped by rebirth, old age, and death; by sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. I’m swamped by suffering, mired in suffering. | T: ‘I am a victim of birth, ageing, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair; I am a victim of suffering, a prey to suffering.
mn29:6.3 | S: Hopefully I can make an end to this entire mass of suffering.’ | T: Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known.’
mn29:6.4 | S: When they’ve gone forth they generate possessions, honor, and popularity. | T: When he has gone forth thus, he acquires gain, honour, and renown.
mn29:6.5 | S: They’re not happy with that, and haven’t got all they wished for. | T: He is not pleased with that gain, honour, and renown, and his intention is not fulfilled
mn29:6.6 | S: They don’t glorify themselves and put others down on account of that. | T: (none)
mn29:6.7 | S: Nor do they become indulgent and fall into negligence on account of those possessions, honor, and popularity. Being diligent, they achieve accomplishment in ethics. | T: …When he is diligent, he achieves the attainment of virtue.
mn29:6.8 | S: They’re happy with that, but they haven’t got all they wished for. | T: He is pleased with that attainment of virtue, but his intention is not fulfilled…
mn29:6.9 | S: They don’t glorify themselves and put others down on account of that. | T: (none)
mn29:6.10 | S: Nor do they become indulgent and fall into negligence regarding that accomplishment in ethics. Being diligent, they achieve accomplishment in immersion. | T: When he is diligent, he achieves the attainment of concentration.
mn29:6.11 | S: They’re happy with that, but they haven’t got all they wished for. | T: He is pleased with that attainment of concentration, but his intention is not fulfilled…When he is diligent,
mn29:6.12 | S: They don’t glorify themselves and put others down on account of that. | T: (none)
mn29:6.13 | S: Nor do they become indulgent and fall into negligence regarding that accomplishment in immersion. Being diligent, they achieve knowledge and vision. | T: he achieves knowledge and vision.
mn29:6.14 | S: They’re happy with that, but they haven’t got all they wished for. | T: He is pleased with that knowledge and vision, but his intention is not fulfilled.
mn29:6.15 | S: They don’t glorify themselves and put others down on account of that. | T: He does not, on account of it, laud himself and disparage others.
mn29:6.16 | S: Nor do they become indulgent and fall into negligence regarding that knowledge and vision. Being diligent, they achieve irreversible freedom. | T: He does not become intoxicated with that knowledge and vision; he does not grow negligent and fall into negligence. Being diligent, he attains perpetual liberation.
mn29:6.17 | S: And it’s impossible for that mendicant to fall away from that irreversible freedom. | T: And it is impossible for that bhikkhu to fall away from that perpetual deliverance.
mn29:6.18 | S: Suppose there was a person in need of heartwood. And while wandering in search of heartwood he’d come across a large tree standing with heartwood. He’d cut out just the heartwood and leave knowing it was heartwood. | T: “Suppose a man needing heartwood, seeking heartwood, wandering in search of heartwood, came to a great tree standing possessed of heartwood, and cutting off only its heartwood, he would take it away knowing it was heartwood.
mn29:6.19 | S: If a person with clear eyes saw him they’d say, | T: Then a man with good sight, seeing him, might say:
mn29:6.20 | S: ‘This gentleman knows what heartwood, softwood, bark, shoots, and branches and leaves are. | T: ‘This good man knew the heartwood, the sapwood, the inner bark, the outer bark, and the twigs and leaves.
mn29:6.21 | S: That’s why he cut out just the heartwood and left knowing it was heartwood. | T: Thus, while needing heartwood, seeking heartwood, wandering in search of heartwood, he came to a great tree standing possessed of heartwood, and cutting off only its heartwood, he took it away knowing it was heartwood.
mn29:6.22 | S: Whatever he needs to make from heartwood, he will succeed.’ … | T: Whatever it was this good man had to make with heartwood, his purpose will be served.’
mn29:6.23 | P: Evameva kho, bhikkhave, idhekacco kulaputto saddhā agārasmā anagāriyaṁ pabbajito hoti: | T: So too, bhikkhus, here some clansman goes forth out of faith…
mn29:6.24 | P: ‘otiṇṇomhi jātiyā jarāya maraṇena sokehi paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upāyāsehi, dukkhotiṇṇo dukkhapareto, | T: (none)
mn29:6.25 | P: appeva nāma imassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa antakiriyā paññāyethā’ti. | T: (none)
mn29:6.26 | P: So evaṁ pabbajito samāno lābhasakkārasilokaṁ abhinibbatteti. | T: (none)
mn29:6.27 | P: So tena lābhasakkārasilokena na attamano hoti, na paripuṇṇasaṅkappo. | T: (none)
mn29:6.28 | P: So tena lābhasakkārasilokena na attānukkaṁseti, na paraṁ vambheti. | T: (none)
mn29:6.29 | P: So tena lābhasakkārasilokena na majjati nappamajjati na pamādaṁ āpajjati, appamatto samāno sīlasampadaṁ ārādheti. | T: (none)
mn29:6.30 | P: So tāya sīlasampadāya attamano hoti, no ca kho paripuṇṇasaṅkappo. | T: (none)
mn29:6.31 | P: So tāya sīlasampadāya na attānukkaṁseti, na paraṁ vambheti. | T: (none)
mn29:6.32 | P: So tāya sīlasampadāya na majjati nappamajjati na pamādaṁ āpajjati, appamatto samāno samādhisampadaṁ ārādheti. | T: (none)
mn29:6.33 | P: So tāya samādhisampadāya attamano hoti, no ca kho paripuṇṇasaṅkappo. | T: (none)
mn29:6.34 | P: So tāya samādhisampadāya na attānukkaṁseti, na paraṁ vambheti. | T: (none)
mn29:6.35 | P: So tāya samādhisampadāya na majjati nappamajjati na pamādaṁ āpajjati, appamatto samāno ñāṇadassanaṁ ārādheti. | T: (none)
mn29:6.36 | P: So tena ñāṇadassanena attamano hoti, no ca kho paripuṇṇasaṅkappo. | T: (none)
mn29:6.37 | P: So tena ñāṇadassanena na attānukkaṁseti, na paraṁ vambheti. | T: (none)
mn29:6.38 | P: So tena ñāṇadassanena na majjati nappamajjati na pamādaṁ āpajjati, appamatto samāno asamayavimokkhaṁ ārādheti. | T: When he is diligent, he attains perpetual liberation.
mn29:6.39 | S: It’s impossible for that mendicant to fall away from that irreversible freedom. | T: And it is impossible for that bhikkhu to fall away from that perpetual deliverance.
mn29:7.1 | S: And so, mendicants, this spiritual life is not lived for the sake of possessions, honor, and popularity, or for accomplishment in ethics, or for accomplishment in immersion, or for knowledge and vision. | T: “So this holy life, bhikkhus, does not have gain, honour, and renown for its benefit, or the attainment of virtue for its benefit, or the attainment of concentration for its benefit, or knowledge and vision for its benefit.
mn29:7.2 | S: It is this unshakable freedom of heart | T: But it is this unshakeable deliverance of mind
mn29:7.3 | S: that is the goal of the spiritual life, the core and the final end.” | T: that is the goal of this holy life, its heartwood, and its end.”
mn29:7.4 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: That is what the Blessed One said.
mn29:7.5 | S: Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said. | T: The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
mn29:7.6 | P: Mahāsāropamasuttaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ navamaṁ. | T: (none)

## mn60
mn60:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
mn60:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he arrived at a village of the Kosalan brahmins named Sālā. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering in the Kosalan country with a large Sangha of bhikkhus, and eventually he arrived at a Kosalan brahmin village named Sālā.
mn60:2.1 | S: The brahmins and householders of Sālā heard: | T: The brahmin householders of Sālā heard:
mn60:2.2 | S: “It seems the ascetic Gotama—a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family—wandering in the land of the Kosalans has arrived at Sālā, together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants. | T: “The recluse Gotama, the son of the Sakyans who went forth from a Sakyan clan, has been wandering in the Kosalan country with a large Sangha of bhikkhus and has come to Sālā.
mn60:2.3 | S: He has this good reputation: | T: Now a good report of Master Gotama has been spread to this effect:
mn60:2.4 | S: ‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ | T: ‘That Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened, blessed.
mn60:2.5 | S: He has realized with his own insight this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—and he makes it known to others. | T: He declares this world with its gods, its Māras, and its Brahmās, this generation with its recluses and brahmins, its princes and its people, which he has himself realised with direct knowledge.
mn60:2.6 | S: He teaches Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. | T: He teaches the Dhamma good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing, and he reveals a holy life that is utterly perfect and pure.’
mn60:2.7 | S: It’s good to see such perfected ones.” | T: Now it is good to see such arahants.”
mn60:3.1 | S: Then the brahmins and householders of Sālā went up to the Buddha. Before sitting down to one side, some bowed, some exchanged greetings and polite conversation, some held up their cupped palms toward the Buddha, some announced their name and clan, while some kept silent. The Buddha said to them: | T: Then the brahmin householders of Sālā went to the Blessed One. Some paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down at one side; some exchanged greetings with him, and when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, sat down at one side; some extended their hands in reverential salutation towards the Blessed One and sat down at one side; some pronounced their name and clan in the Blessed One’s presence and sat down at one side; some kept silent and sat down at one side. When they were seated, the Blessed One asked them:
mn60:4.1 | S: “So, householders, is there any teacher you’re happy with, in whom you have acquired grounded faith?” | T: “Householders, is there any teacher agreeable to you in whom you have acquired faith supported by reasons?”
mn60:4.2 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “No, venerable sir, there is no teacher agreeable to us in whom we have acquired faith supported by reasons.”
mn60:4.3 | S: “Since you haven’t found a teacher you’re happy with, you should undertake and implement this sure bet teaching. | T: “Since, householders, you have not found an agreeable teacher, you may undertake and practise this incontrovertible teaching;
mn60:4.4 | S: For when the sure bet teaching is undertaken, it will be for your lasting welfare and happiness. | T: for when the incontrovertible teaching is accepted and undertaken, it will lead to your welfare and happiness for a long time.
mn60:4.5 | S: And what is the sure bet teaching? | T: And what is the incontrovertible teaching?
mn60:5.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: | T: i. The Doctrine of Nihilism A “Householders, there are some recluses and brahmins whose doctrine and view is this:
mn60:5.2 | S: ‘There’s no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There’s no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There’s no afterlife. There’s no such thing as mother and father, or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there’s no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ | T: ‘There is nothing given, nothing offered, nothing sacrificed; no fruit or result of good and bad actions; no this world, no other world; no mother, no father; no beings who are reborn spontaneously; no good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who have themselves realised by direct knowledge and declare this world and the other world.’
mn60:6.1 | S: And there are some ascetics and brahmins whose doctrine directly contradicts this. | T: B “Now there are some recluses and brahmins whose doctrine is directly opposed to that of those recluses and brahmins,
mn60:6.2 | S: They say: | T: and they say thus:
mn60:6.3 | S: ‘There is meaning in giving, sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother and father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ | T: ‘There is what is given and what is offered and what is sacrificed; there is fruit and result of good and bad actions; there is this world and the other world; there is mother and father; there are beings who are reborn spontaneously; there are good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who have themselves realised by direct knowledge and declare this world and the other world.’
mn60:6.4 | S: What do you think, householders? | T: What do you think, householders?
mn60:6.5 | S: Don’t these doctrines directly contradict each other?” | T: Don’t these recluses and brahmins hold doctrines directly opposed to each other?”—
mn60:6.6 | S: “Yes, sir.” | T: “Yes, venerable sir.”
mn60:7.1 | S: “Since this is so, consider those ascetics and brahmins whose view is that | T: A.i “Now, householders, of those recluses and brahmins whose doctrine and view is this:
mn60:7.2 | S: there’s no meaning in giving, etc. | T: ‘There is nothing given…no good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who have themselves realised by direct knowledge and declare this world and the other world,’
mn60:7.3 | S: You can expect that they will shun good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and undertake and implement bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: it is to be expected that they will avoid these three wholesome states, namely, good bodily conduct, good verbal conduct, and good mental conduct, and that they will undertake and practise these three unwholesome states, namely, bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, and mental misconduct.
mn60:7.4 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn60:7.5 | S: Because those ascetics and brahmins don’t see that unskillful qualities are full of drawbacks, sordidness, and corruption, or that skillful qualities have the benefit and cleansing power of renunciation. | T: Because those good recluses and brahmins do not see in unwholesome states the danger, degradation, and defilement, nor do they see in wholesome states the blessing of renunciation, the aspect of cleansing.
mn60:8.1 | S: Moreover, since there actually is another world, their view that there is no other world is wrong view. | T: A.ii “Since there actually is another world, one who holds the view ‘there is no other world’ has wrong view.
mn60:8.2 | S: Since there actually is another world, their thought that there is no other world is wrong purpose. | T: Since there actually is another world, one who intends ‘there is no other world’ has wrong intention.
mn60:8.3 | S: Since there actually is another world, their speech that there is no other world is wrong speech. | T: Since there actually is another world, one who makes the statement ‘there is no other world’ has wrong speech.
mn60:8.4 | S: Since there actually is another world, in saying that there is no other world they contradict those perfected ones who know the other world. | T: Since there actually is another world, one who says ‘there is no other world’ is opposed to those arahants who know the other world.
mn60:8.5 | S: Since there actually is another world, in persuading another that there is no other world they are persuading them to accept an untrue teaching. | T: Since there actually is another world, one who convinces another ‘there is no other world’ convinces him to accept an untrue Dhamma;
mn60:8.6 | S: And on account of that they glorify themselves and put others down. | T: and because he convinces another to accept an untrue Dhamma, he praises himself and disparages others.
mn60:8.7 | S: So they give up their former ethical conduct and are established in unethical conduct. | T: Thus any pure virtue that he formerly had is abandoned and corrupt conduct is substituted.
mn60:8.8 | S: And that is how these many bad, unskillful qualities come to be with wrong view as condition—wrong view, wrong purpose, wrong speech, contradicting the noble ones, persuading others to accept untrue teachings, and glorifying oneself and putting others down. | T: And this wrong view, wrong intention, wrong speech, opposition to noble ones, convincing another to accept an untrue Dhamma, and self-praise and disparagement of others—these several evil unwholesome states thus come into being with wrong view as their condition.
mn60:9.1 | S: A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: | T: A.iii “About this a wise man considers thus:
mn60:9.2 | S: ‘If there is no other world, when this individual person’s body breaks up they will keep themselves safe. | T: ‘If there is no other world, then on the dissolution of the body this good person will have made himself safe enough.
mn60:9.3 | S: And if there is another world, when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: But if there is another world, then on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.
mn60:9.4 | S: But let us grant that those who say that there is no other world are correct. | T: Now whether or not the word of those good recluses and brahmins is true, let me assume that there is no other world:
mn60:9.5 | S: Regardless, that individual is still criticized by sensible people in this very life as being an immoral individual of wrong view, a nihilist.’ | T: still this good person is here and now censured by the wise as an immoral person, one of wrong view who holds the doctrine of nihilism.
mn60:9.6 | S: But if there really is another world, they hold a losing hand on both counts. | T: But on the other hand, if there is another world, then this good person has made an unlucky throw on both counts:
mn60:9.7 | S: For they are criticized by sensible people in this very life, and when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: since he is censured by the wise here and now, and since on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.
mn60:9.8 | S: They have wrongly undertaken this sure bet teaching in such a way that it encompasses the positive outcomes of one side only, leaving out the skillful premise. | T: He has wrongly accepted and undertaken this incontrovertible teaching in such a way that it extends only to one side and excludes the wholesome alternative.’
mn60:10.1 | S: Since this is so, consider those ascetics and brahmins whose view is that | T: B.i “Now, householders, of those recluses and brahmins whose doctrine and view is this:
mn60:10.2 | S: there is meaning in giving, etc. | T: ‘There is what is given…there are good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who have themselves realised by direct knowledge and declare this world and the other world,’
mn60:10.3 | S: You can expect that they will shun bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and undertake and implement good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: it is to be expected that they will avoid these three unwholesome states, namely, bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, and mental misconduct, and that they will undertake and practise these three wholesome states, namely, good bodily conduct, good verbal conduct, and good mental conduct.
mn60:10.4 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn60:10.5 | S: Because those ascetics and brahmins see that unskillful qualities are full of drawbacks, sordidness, and corruption, and that skillful qualities have the benefit and cleansing power of renunciation. | T: Because those good recluses and brahmins see in unwholesome states the danger, degradation, and defilement, and they see in wholesome states the blessing of renunciation, the aspect of cleansing.
mn60:11.1 | S: Moreover, since there actually is another world, their view that there is another world is right view. | T: B.ii “Since there actually is another world, one who holds the view ‘there is another world’ has right view.
mn60:11.2 | S: Since there actually is another world, their thought that there is another world is right purpose. | T: Since there actually is another world, one who intends ‘there is another world’ has right intention.
mn60:11.3 | S: Since there actually is another world, their speech that there is another world is right speech. | T: Since there actually is another world, one who makes the statement ‘there is another world’ has right speech.
mn60:11.4 | S: Since there actually is another world, in saying that there is another world they don’t contradict those perfected ones who know the other world. | T: Since there actually is another world, one who says ‘there is another world’ is not opposed to those arahants who know the other world.
mn60:11.5 | S: Since there actually is another world, in persuading another that there is another world they are persuading them to accept a true teaching. | T: Since there actually is another world, one who convinces another ‘there is another world’ convinces him to accept true Dhamma;
mn60:11.6 | S: And on account of that they don’t glorify themselves or put others down. | T: and because he convinces another to accept true Dhamma, he does not praise himself and disparage others.
mn60:11.7 | S: So they give up their former unethical conduct and are established in ethical conduct. | T: Thus any corrupt conduct that he formerly had is abandoned and pure virtue is substituted.
mn60:11.8 | S: And that is how these many skillful qualities come to be with right view as condition—right view, right purpose, right speech, not contradicting the noble ones, persuading others to accept true teachings, and not glorifying oneself or putting others down. | T: And this right view, right intention, right speech, non-opposition to noble ones, convincing another to accept true Dhamma, and avoidance of self-praise and disparagement of others—these several wholesome states thus come into being with right view as their condition.
mn60:12.1 | S: A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: | T: B.iii “About this a wise man considers thus:
mn60:12.2 | S: ‘If there is another world, when this individual’s body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. | T: ‘If there is another world, then on the dissolution of the body, after death, this good person will reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.
mn60:12.3 | S: But let us grant that those who say that there is no other world are correct. | T: Now whether or not the word of those good recluses and brahmins is true, let me assume that there is no other world:
mn60:12.4 | S: Regardless, that individual is still praised by sensible people in this very life as being a moral individual of right view, who affirms a positive teaching.’ | T: still this good person is here and now praised by the wise as a virtuous person, one with right view who holds the doctrine of affirmation.
mn60:12.5 | S: So if there really is another world, they hold a winning hand on both counts. | T: And on the other hand, if there is another world, then this good person has made a lucky throw on both counts:
mn60:12.6 | S: For they are praised by sensible people in this very life, and when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. | T: since he is praised by the wise here and now, and since on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.
mn60:12.7 | S: They have rightly undertaken this sure bet teaching in such a way that it encompasses the positive outcomes of both sides, leaving out the unskillful premise. | T: He has rightly accepted and undertaken this incontrovertible teaching in such a way that it extends to both sides and excludes the unwholesome alternative.’
mn60:13.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: | T: ii. The Doctrine of Non-Doing A “Householders, there are some recluses and brahmins whose doctrine and view is this:
mn60:13.2 | S: ‘The one who acts does nothing wrong when they punish, mutilate, torture, aggrieve, oppress, intimidate, or when they encourage others to do the same. They do nothing wrong when they kill, steal, break into houses, plunder wealth, steal from isolated buildings, commit highway robbery, commit adultery, and lie. | T: ‘When one acts or makes others act, when one mutilates or makes others mutilate, when one tortures or makes others inflict torture, when one inflicts sorrow or makes others inflict sorrow, when one oppresses or makes others inflict oppression, when one intimidates or makes others inflict intimidation, when one kills living beings, takes what is not given, breaks into houses, plunders wealth, commits burglary, ambushes highways, seduces another’s wife, utters falsehood—no evil is done by the doer.
mn60:13.3 | S: If you were to reduce all the living creatures of this earth to one heap and mass of flesh with a razor-edged chakram, no evil comes of that, and no outcome of evil. | T: If, with a razor-rimmed wheel, one were to make the living beings on this earth into one mass of flesh, into one heap of flesh, because of this there would be no evil and no outcome of evil.
mn60:13.4 | S: If you were to go along the south bank of the Ganges killing, mutilating, and torturing, and encouraging others to do the same, no evil comes of that, and no outcome of evil. | T: If one were to go along the south bank of the Ganges killing and slaughtering, mutilating and making others mutilate, torturing and making others inflict torture, because of this there would be no evil and no outcome of evil.
mn60:13.5 | S: If you were to go along the north bank of the Ganges giving and sacrificing and encouraging others to do the same, no merit comes of that, and no outcome of merit. | T: If one were to go along the north bank of the Ganges giving gifts and making others give gifts, making offerings and making others make offerings, because of this there would be no merit and no outcome of merit.
mn60:13.6 | S: In giving, self-control, restraint, and truthfulness there is no merit or outcome of merit.’ | T: By giving, by taming oneself, by restraint, by speaking truth, there is no merit and no outcome of merit.’
mn60:14.1 | S: And there are some ascetics and brahmins whose doctrine directly contradicts this. They say: | T: B “Now there are some recluses and brahmins whose doctrine is directly opposed to that of those recluses and brahmins, and they say thus:
mn60:14.2 | S: ‘The one who acts does a bad deed when they punish, mutilate, torture, aggrieve, oppress, intimidate, or when they encourage others to do the same. They do a bad deed when they kill, steal, break into houses, plunder wealth, steal from isolated buildings, commit highway robbery, commit adultery, and lie. | T: ‘When one acts or makes others act, when one mutilates or makes others mutilate…utters falsehood—evil is done by the doer.
mn60:14.3 | S: If you were to reduce all the living creatures of this earth to one heap and mass of flesh with a razor-edged chakram, evil comes of that, and an outcome of evil. | T: If, with a razor-rimmed wheel, one were to make the living beings on this earth into one mass of flesh, into one heap of flesh, because of this there would be evil and the outcome of evil.
mn60:14.4 | S: If you were to go along the south bank of the Ganges killing, mutilating, and torturing, and encouraging others to do the same, evil comes of that, and an outcome of evil. | T: If one were to go along the south bank of the Ganges killing and slaughtering, mutilating and making others mutilate, torturing and making others inflict torture, because of this there would be evil and the outcome of evil.
mn60:14.5 | S: If you were to go along the north bank of the Ganges giving and sacrificing and encouraging others to do the same, merit comes of that, and an outcome of merit. | T: If one were to go along the north bank of the Ganges giving gifts and making others give gifts, making offerings and making others make offerings, because of this there would be merit and the outcome of merit.
mn60:14.6 | S: In giving, self-control, restraint, and truthfulness there is merit and outcome of merit.’ | T: By giving, by taming oneself, by restraint, by speaking truth, there is merit and the outcome of merit.’
mn60:14.7 | S: What do you think, householders? | T: What do you think, householders?
mn60:14.8 | S: Don’t these doctrines directly contradict each other?” | T: Don’t these recluses and brahmins hold doctrines directly opposed to each other?”—
mn60:14.9 | S: “Yes, sir.” | T: “Yes, venerable sir.”
mn60:15.1 | S: “Since this is so, consider those ascetics and brahmins whose view is that | T: A.i “Now, householders, of those recluses and brahmins whose doctrine and view is this:
mn60:15.2 | S: the one who acts does nothing wrong when they punish, etc. | T: ‘When one acts or makes others act…there is no merit and no outcome of merit,’
mn60:15.3 | P: Khurapariyantena cepi cakkena yo imissā pathaviyā pāṇe ekaṁ maṁsakhalaṁ ekaṁ maṁsapuñjaṁ kareyya, natthi tatonidānaṁ pāpaṁ, natthi pāpassa āgamo. | T: (none)
mn60:15.4 | P: Dakkhiṇañcepi gaṅgāya tīraṁ gaccheyya hananto ghātento …pe… dānena damena saṁyamena saccavajjena natthi puññaṁ, natthi puññassa āgamo’ti | T: (none)
mn60:15.5 | S: You can expect that they will shun good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and undertake and implement bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: it is to be expected that they will avoid these three wholesome states, namely, good bodily conduct, good verbal conduct and good mental conduct, and that they will undertake and practise these three unwholesome states, namely, bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, and mental misconduct.
mn60:15.6 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn60:15.7 | S: Because those ascetics and brahmins don’t see that unskillful qualities are full of drawbacks, sordidness, and corruption, or that skillful qualities have the benefit and cleansing power of renunciation. | T: Because those good recluses and brahmins do not see in unwholesome states the danger, degradation, and defilement, nor do they see in wholesome states the blessing of renunciation, the aspect of cleansing.
mn60:16.1 | S: Moreover, since action actually does have an effect, their view that action is ineffective is wrong view. | T: A.ii “Since there actually is doing, one who holds the view ‘there is no doing’ has wrong view.
mn60:16.2 | S: Since action actually does have an effect, their thought that action is ineffective is wrong purpose. | T: Since there actually is doing, one who intends ‘there is no doing’ has wrong intention.
mn60:16.3 | S: Since action actually does have an effect, their speech that action is ineffective is wrong speech. | T: Since there actually is doing, one who makes the statement ‘there is no doing’ has wrong speech.
mn60:16.4 | S: Since action actually does have an effect, in saying that action is ineffective they contradict those perfected ones who teach that action is effective. | T: Since there actually is doing, one who says ‘there is no doing’ is opposed to those arahants who hold the doctrine that there is doing.
mn60:16.5 | S: Since action actually does have an effect, in persuading another that action is ineffective they are persuading them to accept an untrue teaching. | T: Since there actually is doing, one who convinces another ‘there is no doing’ convinces him to accept an untrue Dhamma;
mn60:16.6 | S: And on account of that they glorify themselves and put others down. | T: and because he convinces another to accept an untrue Dhamma, he praises himself and disparages others.
mn60:16.7 | S: So they give up their former ethical conduct and are established in unethical conduct. | T: Thus any pure virtue that he formerly had is abandoned and corrupt conduct is substituted.
mn60:16.8 | S: And that is how these many bad, unskillful qualities come to be with wrong view as condition—wrong view, wrong purpose, wrong speech, contradicting the noble ones, persuading others to accept untrue teachings, and glorifying oneself and putting others down. | T: And this wrong view, wrong intention, wrong speech, opposition to noble ones, convincing another to accept an untrue Dhamma, and self-praise and disparagement of others—these several evil unwholesome states thus come into being with wrong view as their condition.
mn60:17.1 | S: A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: | T: A.iii “About this a wise man considers thus:
mn60:17.2 | S: ‘If there is no effective action, when this individual’s body breaks up they will keep themselves safe. | T: ‘If there is no doing, then on the dissolution of the body this good person will have made himself safe enough.
mn60:17.3 | S: And if there is effective action, when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: But if there is doing, then on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.
mn60:17.4 | S: But let us grant that those who say that there is no effective action are correct. | T: Now whether or not the word of those good recluses and brahmins is true, let me assume that there is no doing:
mn60:17.5 | S: Regardless, that individual is still criticized by sensible people in this very life as being an immoral individual of wrong view, one who denies the efficacy of action.’ | T: still this good person is here and now censured by the wise as an immoral person, one of wrong view who holds the doctrine of non-doing.
mn60:17.6 | S: But if there really is effective action, they hold a losing hand on both counts. | T: But on the other hand, if there is doing, then this good person has made an unlucky throw on both counts:
mn60:17.7 | S: For they are criticized by sensible people in this very life, and when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: since he is censured by the wise here and now, and since on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.
mn60:17.8 | S: They have wrongly undertaken this sure bet teaching in such a way that it encompasses the positive outcomes of one side only, leaving out the skillful premise. | T: He has wrongly accepted and undertaken this incontrovertible teaching in such a way that it extends only to one side and excludes the wholesome alternative.’
mn60:18.1 | S: Since this is so, consider those ascetics and brahmins whose view is that | T: B.i “Now, householders, of those recluses and brahmins whose doctrine and view is this:
mn60:18.2 | S: the one who acts does a bad deed when they punish, etc. | T: ‘When one acts or makes others act…there is merit and outcome of merit,’
mn60:18.3 | P: Khurapariyantena cepi cakkena yo imissā pathaviyā pāṇe ekaṁ maṁsakhalaṁ ekaṁ maṁsapuñjaṁ kareyya, atthi tatonidānaṁ pāpaṁ, atthi pāpassa āgamo. | T: (none)
mn60:18.4 | P: Dakkhiṇañcepi gaṅgāya tīraṁ gaccheyya hananto ghātento, chindanto chedāpento, pacanto pācento, atthi tatonidānaṁ pāpaṁ, atthi pāpassa āgamo. | T: (none)
mn60:18.5 | P: Uttarañcepi gaṅgāya tīraṁ gaccheyya dadanto dāpento, yajanto yajāpento, atthi tatonidānaṁ puññaṁ, atthi puññassa āgamo. Dānena damena saṁyamena saccavajjena atthi puññaṁ, atthi puññassa āgamo’ti | T: (none)
mn60:18.6 | S: You can expect that they will shun bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and undertake and implement good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: it is to be expected that they will avoid these three unwholesome states, namely, bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, and mental misconduct, and that they will undertake and practise these three wholesome states, namely, good bodily conduct, good verbal conduct, and good mental conduct.
mn60:18.7 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn60:18.8 | S: Because those ascetics and brahmins see that unskillful qualities are full of drawbacks, sordidness, and corruption, and that skillful qualities have the benefit and cleansing power of renunciation. | T: Because those good recluses and brahmins see in unwholesome states the danger, degradation, and defilement, and they see in wholesome states the blessing of renunciation, the aspect of cleansing.
mn60:19.1 | S: Moreover, since action actually does have an effect, their view that action is effective is right view. | T: B.ii “Since there actually is doing, one who holds the view ‘there is doing’ has right view.
mn60:19.2 | S: Since action actually does have an effect, their thought that action is effective is right purpose. | T: Since there actually is doing, one who intends ‘there is doing’ has right intention.
