## mn77, continued
mn77:27.4 | S: In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads themselves with bliss free of rapture. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with bliss free of rapture. | T: so too, a bhikkhu makes the pleasure divested of rapture drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the pleasure divested of rapture.
mn77:28.1 | S: Furthermore, with the giving up of pleasure and pain and the disappearance of former happiness and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption. It is without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. | T: “Again, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna, which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
mn77:28.2 | S: They sit spreading their body through with pure bright mind. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with pure bright mind. | T: He sits pervading this body with a pure bright mind, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the pure bright mind.
mn77:28.3 | S: It’s like someone sitting wrapped from head to foot with white cloth. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread over with white cloth. | T: Just as though a man were sitting covered from the head down with a white cloth, so that there would be no part of his whole body not covered by the white cloth;
mn77:28.4 | S: In the same way, they sit spreading their body through with pure bright mind. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with pure bright mind. | T: so too, a bhikkhu sits pervading this body with a pure bright mind, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the pure bright mind.
mn77:28.5 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:29.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to understand this: | T: 12. Insight Knowledge “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to understand thus :
mn77:29.2 | S: ‘This body of mine is formed. It’s made up of the four principal states, produced by mother and father, built up from rice and porridge, liable to impermanence, to wearing away and erosion, to breaking up and destruction. | T: ‘This body of mine, made of material form, consisting of the four great elements, procreated by a mother and father, and built up out of boiled rice and porridge, is subject to impermanence, to being worn and rubbed away, to dissolution and disintegration,
mn77:29.3 | S: And this consciousness of mine is attached to it, tied to it.’ | T: and this consciousness of mine is supported by it and bound up with it.’
mn77:29.4 | S: Suppose there was a beryl gem that was naturally lustrous, eight-faceted, well-worked, transparent and clear, endowed with all good qualities. | T: Suppose there were a beautiful beryl gem of purest water, eight-faceted, well cut, clear and limpid, possessed of all good qualities,
mn77:29.5 | S: And it was strung with a thread of blue, yellow, red, white, or golden brown. | T: and through it a blue, yellow, red, white, or brown thread would be strung.
mn77:29.6 | S: And a person with clear eyes were to take it in their hand and examine it: | T: Then a man with good sight, taking it in his hand, might review it thus:
mn77:29.7 | S: ‘This beryl gem is naturally lustrous, eight-faceted, well-worked, transparent and clear, endowed with all good qualities. | T: ‘This is a beautiful beryl gem of purest water, eight-faceted, well cut, clear and limpid, possessed of all good qualities,
mn77:29.8 | S: And it’s strung with a thread of blue, yellow, red, white, or golden brown.’ | T: and through it is strung a blue, yellow, red, white, or brown thread.’
mn77:29.9 | S: In the same way, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to understand this: | T: So too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to understand thus:
mn77:29.10 | S: ‘This body of mine is formed. It’s made up of the four principal states, produced by mother and father, built up from rice and porridge, liable to impermanence, to wearing away and erosion, to breaking up and destruction. | T: ‘This body of mine…is subject to impermanence, to being worn and rubbed away, to dissolution and disintegration,
mn77:29.11 | S: And this consciousness of mine is attached to it, tied to it.’ | T: and this consciousness of mine is supported by it and bound up with it.’
mn77:29.12 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:30.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to create from this body another body—formed, mind-made, whole in its major and minor limbs, not deficient in any faculty. | T: 13. The Mind-Made Body “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to create from this body another body having form, mind-made, with all its limbs, lacking no faculty.
mn77:30.2 | S: Suppose a person was to draw a reed out from its sheath. | T: Just as though a man were to pull out a reed from its sheath and think thus:
mn77:30.3 | S: They’d think: | T: (none)
mn77:30.4 | S: ‘This is the reed, this is the sheath. The reed and the sheath are different things. The reed has been drawn out from the sheath.’ | T: ‘This is the sheath, this is the reed; the sheath is one, the reed is another; it is from the sheath that the reed has been pulled out’;
mn77:30.5 | S: Or suppose a person was to draw a sword out from its scabbard. | T: or just as though a man were to pull out a sword from its scabbard and think thus:
mn77:30.6 | S: They’d think: | T: (none)
mn77:30.7 | S: ‘This is the sword, this is the scabbard. The sword and the scabbard are different things. The sword has been drawn out from the scabbard.’ | T: ‘This is the sword, this is the scabbard; the sword is one, the scabbard another; it is from the scabbard that the sword has been pulled out’;
mn77:30.8 | S: Or suppose a person was to draw a snake out from its slough. | T: or just as though a man were to pull a snake out of its slough and think thus:
mn77:30.9 | S: They’d think: | T: (none)
mn77:30.10 | S: ‘This is the snake, this is the slough. The snake and the slough are different things. The snake has been drawn out from the slough.’ | T: ‘This is the snake, this is the slough; the snake is one, the slough another; it is from the slough that the snake has been pulled out.’
mn77:30.11 | S: In the same way, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to create from this body another body—formed, mind-made, whole in its major and minor limbs, not deficient in any faculty. | T: So too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to create from this body another body having form, mind-made, with all its limbs, lacking no faculty.
mn77:30.12 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:31.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to wield the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying themselves and becoming one again; materializing and dematerializing; going unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful. They control the body as far as the realm of divinity. | T: 14. The Kinds of Supernormal Power “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to wield the various kinds of supernormal power: having been one, they become many; having been many, they become one; they appear and vanish; they go unhindered through walls, through enclosures, through mountains, as though through space; they dive in and out of the earth as though it were water; they walk on water without sinking as though it were earth; seated cross-legged, they travel in space like birds; with their hands they touch and stroke the moon and sun so powerful and mighty; they wield bodily mastery even as far as the Brahma-world.
mn77:31.2 | S: Suppose a deft potter or their apprentice had some well-prepared clay. They could produce any kind of pot that they like. | T: Just as a skilled potter or his apprentice might create and fashion out of well-prepared clay any shape of pot he wished;
mn77:31.3 | S: Or suppose a deft ivory-carver or their apprentice had some well-prepared ivory. They could produce any kind of ivory item that they like. | T: or just as a skilled ivory-worker or his apprentice might create and fashion out of well-prepared ivory any ivory work of art he wished;
mn77:31.4 | S: Or suppose a deft goldsmith or their apprentice had some well-prepared gold. They could produce any kind of gold item that they like. | T: or just as a skilled goldsmith or his apprentice might create and fashion out of well-prepared gold any gold work of art he wished;
mn77:31.5 | S: In the same way, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to wield the many kinds of psychic power … | T: so too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to wield the various kinds of supernormal power… …they wield bodily mastery even as far as the Brahma-world.
mn77:31.6 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:32.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use so that, with clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, they hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far. | T: 15. The Divine Ear Element “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way whereby with the divine ear element, which is purified and surpasses the human, they hear both kinds of sounds, the divine and the human, those that are far as well as near.
mn77:32.2 | S: Suppose there was a powerful horn blower. They’d easily make themselves heard in the four quarters. | T: Just as a vigorous trumpeter might make himself heard without difficulty in the four quarters;
mn77:32.3 | S: In the same way, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use so that, with clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, they hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far. | T: so too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way whereby with the divine ear element…far as well as near.
mn77:32.4 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:33.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having encompassed them with their own mind. | T: 16. Understanding the Minds of Others “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to understand the minds of other beings, of other persons, having encompassed them with their own minds.
mn77:33.2 | S: They understand mind with greed as ‘mind with greed’, | T: They understand a mind affected by lust as affected by lust and a mind unaffected by lust as unaffected by lust;
mn77:33.3 | S: and mind without greed as ‘mind without greed’; | T: (none)
mn77:33.4 | S: mind with hate as ‘mind with hate’, | T: they understand a mind affected by hate as affected by hate and a mind unaffected by hate as unaffected by hate;
mn77:33.5 | S: and mind without hate as ‘mind without hate’; | T: (none)
mn77:33.6 | S: mind with delusion as ‘mind with delusion’, | T: they understand a mind affected by delusion as affected by delusion and a mind unaffected by delusion as unaffected by delusion;
mn77:33.7 | S: and mind without delusion as ‘mind without delusion’; | T: (none)
mn77:33.8 | S: constricted mind as ‘constricted mind’, | T: they understand a contracted mind as contracted and a distracted mind as distracted;
mn77:33.9 | S: and scattered mind as ‘scattered mind’; | T: (none)
mn77:33.10 | S: expansive mind as ‘expansive mind’, | T: they understand an exalted mind as exalted and an unexalted mind as unexalted;
mn77:33.11 | S: and unexpansive mind as ‘unexpansive mind’; | T: (none)
mn77:33.12 | S: mind that is not supreme as ‘mind that is not supreme’, | T: they understand a surpassed mind as surpassed and an unsurpassed mind as unsurpassed;
mn77:33.13 | S: and mind that is supreme as ‘mind that is supreme’; | T: (none)
mn77:33.14 | S: mind immersed in samādhi as ‘mind immersed in samādhi’, | T: they understand a concentrated mind as concentrated and an unconcentrated mind as unconcentrated;
mn77:33.15 | S: and mind not immersed in samādhi as ‘mind not immersed in samādhi’; | T: (none)
mn77:33.16 | S: freed mind as ‘freed mind’, | T: they understand a liberated mind as liberated and an unliberated mind as unliberated.
mn77:33.17 | S: and unfreed mind as ‘unfreed mind’. | T: (none)
mn77:33.18 | S: Suppose there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of adornments, and they check their own reflection in a clean bright mirror or a clear bowl of water. If they had a spot they’d know ‘I have a spot’, and if they had no spots they’d know ‘I have no spots’. | T: Just as a man or a woman—young, youthful, and fond of ornaments—on viewing the image of his or her own face in a clean bright mirror or in a bowl of clear water, would know if there were a spot thus: ‘There is a spot,’ or would know if there were no spot thus: ‘There is no spot’;
mn77:33.19 | S: In the same way, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having encompassed them with their own mind … | T: so too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to understand…an unliberated mind as unliberated.
mn77:33.20 | P: sarāgaṁ vā cittaṁ ‘sarāgaṁ cittan’ti pajānanti, | T: (none)
mn77:33.21 | P: vītarāgaṁ vā cittaṁ …pe… | T: (none)
mn77:33.22 | P: sadosaṁ vā cittaṁ … | T: (none)
mn77:33.23 | P: vītadosaṁ vā cittaṁ … | T: (none)
mn77:33.24 | P: samohaṁ vā cittaṁ … | T: (none)
mn77:33.25 | P: vītamohaṁ vā cittaṁ … | T: (none)
mn77:33.26 | P: saṅkhittaṁ vā cittaṁ … | T: (none)
mn77:33.27 | P: vikkhittaṁ vā cittaṁ … | T: (none)
mn77:33.28 | P: mahaggataṁ vā cittaṁ … | T: (none)
mn77:33.29 | P: amahaggataṁ vā cittaṁ … | T: (none)
mn77:33.30 | P: sauttaraṁ vā cittaṁ … | T: (none)
mn77:33.31 | P: anuttaraṁ vā cittaṁ … | T: (none)
mn77:33.32 | P: samāhitaṁ vā cittaṁ … | T: (none)
mn77:33.33 | P: asamāhitaṁ vā cittaṁ … | T: (none)
mn77:33.34 | P: vimuttaṁ vā cittaṁ … | T: (none)
mn77:33.35 | P: avimuttaṁ vā cittaṁ ‘avimuttaṁ cittan’ti pajānanti. | T: (none)
mn77:33.36 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:34.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to recollect the many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ And so they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details. | T: 17. The Recollection of Past Lives “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to recollect their manifold past lives, that is, one birth, two births, three births, four births, five births, ten births, twenty births, thirty births, forty births, fifty births, a hundred births, a thousand births, a hundred thousand births, many aeons of world-contraction, many aeons of world-expansion, many aeons of world-contraction and expansion: ‘There I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my nutriment, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life-term; and passing away from there, I reappeared elsewhere; and there too I was so named…and passing away from there, I reappeared here.’ Thus with their aspects and particulars they recollect their manifold past lives.
mn77:34.2 | S: Suppose a person was to leave their home village and go to another village. From that village they’d go to yet another village. And from that village they’d return to their home village. They’d think: ‘I went from my home village to another village. There I stood like this, sat like that, spoke like this, or kept silent like that. From that village I went to yet another village. There too I stood like this, sat like that, spoke like this, or kept silent like that. And from that village I returned to my home village.’ | T: Just as a man might go from his own village to another village and then back again to his own village. He might think: ‘I went from my own village to that village, and there I stood in such a way, sat in such a way, spoke in such a way, kept silent in such a way; and from that village I went to that other village and there I stood in such a way…kept silent in such a way; and from that village I came back again to my own village.’
mn77:34.3 | S: In the same way, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to recollect the many kinds of past lives. | T: So too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to recollect their manifold lives…Thus with their aspects and particulars they recollect their manifold past lives.
mn77:34.4 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:35.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use so that, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds: ‘These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’ And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. | T: 18. The Divine Eye “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way whereby with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, they see beings passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate. They understand how beings pass on according to their actions thus: ‘These worthy beings who were ill conducted in body, speech, and mind, revilers of noble ones, wrong in their views, giving effect to wrong view in their actions, on the dissolution of the body, after death, have reappeared in a state of deprivation, in a bad destination, in perdition, even in hell; but these worthy beings who were well conducted in body, speech, and mind, not revilers of noble ones, right in their views, giving effect to right view in their actions, on the dissolution of the body, after death, have reappeared in a good destination, even in the heavenly world.’ Thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, they see beings passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and they understand how beings pass on according to their actions.
mn77:35.2 | S: Suppose there were two houses with doors. A person with clear eyes standing in between them would see humans entering and leaving a house and wandering to and fro. | T: Just as though there were two houses with doors and a man with good sight standing there between them saw people entering the houses and coming out and passing to and fro.
mn77:35.3 | S: In the same way, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use so that, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn … | T: So too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way whereby with the divine eye…They understand how beings pass on according to their actions.
mn77:35.4 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:36.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom. And they live having realized it with their own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements. | T: 19. The Destruction of the Taints “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way whereby by realising for themselves with direct knowledge, they here and now enter upon and abide in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints.
mn77:36.2 | S: Suppose that in a mountain glen there was a lake that was transparent, clear, and unclouded. A person with clear eyes standing on the bank would see the clams and mussels, pebbles and gravel, and schools of fish swimming about or staying still. They’d think: ‘This lake is transparent, clear, and unclouded. And here are the clams and mussels, pebbles and gravel, and schools of fish swimming about or staying still.’ | T: Just as if there were a lake in a mountain recess, clear, limpid, and undisturbed, so that a man with good sight standing on the bank could see shells, gravel, and pebbles, and also shoals of fish swimming about and resting. He might think: ‘There is this lake, clear, limpid, and undisturbed, and there are these shells, gravel, and pebbles, and also these shoals of fish swimming about and resting.’
mn77:36.3 | S: In the same way, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom. And they live having realized it with their own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements. | T: So too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way whereby by realising for themselves with direct knowledge, they here and now enter upon and abide in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints.
mn77:36.4 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:37.1 | S: This is the fifth quality because of which my disciples are loyal to me. | T: “This, Udāyin, is the fifth quality because of which my disciples honour, respect, revere, and venerate me, and live in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me.
mn77:38.1 | S: These are the five qualities because of which my disciples honor, respect, revere, and venerate me; and honoring and respecting me, they remain loyal to me.” | T: “These, Udāyin, are the five qualities because of which my disciples honour, respect, revere, and venerate me, and live in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me.”
mn77:38.2 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: That is what the Blessed One said.
mn77:38.3 | S: Satisfied, the wanderer Sakuludāyī approved what the Buddha said. | T: The wanderer Udāyin was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
mn77:38.4 | P: Mahāsakuludāyisuttaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ sattamaṁ. | T: (none)

## mn8
mn8:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
mn8:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
mn8:2.1 | S: Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Mahācunda came out of retreat and went to the Buddha. He bowed, sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha: | T: Then, when it was evening, the venerable Mahā Cunda rose from meditation and went to the Blessed One. After paying homage to the Blessed One he sat down at one side and said to him:
mn8:3.1 | S: “Sir, there are many different views that arise in the world | T: “Venerable sir, various views arise in the world associated either with doctrines of a self or with doctrines about the world.
mn8:3.2 | S: connected with theories of self or with theories of the cosmos. | T: (none)
mn8:3.3 | S: How does a mendicant who is focusing on the starting point give up and let go of these views?” | T: Now does the abandoning and relinquishing of those views come about in a bhikkhu who is attending only to the beginning of his meditative training?”
mn8:3.4 | S: “Cunda, there are many different views that arise in the world | T: “Cunda, as to those various views that arise in the world associated either with doctrines of a self or with doctrines about the world:
mn8:3.5 | S: connected with theories of self or with theories of the cosmos. | T: (none)
mn8:3.6 | S: A mendicant gives up and lets go of these views by truly seeing with right wisdom where they arise, where they settle in, and where they operate as: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ | T: if the object in relation to which those views arise, which they underlie, and which they are exercised upon is seen as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self,’ then the abandoning and relinquishing of those views comes about.
mn8:4.1 | S: It’s possible that a certain mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, might enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: The Eight Attainments “It is possible here, Cunda, that quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, some bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
mn8:4.2 | S: They might think | T: He might think thus:
mn8:4.3 | S: they’re practicing self-effacement. | T: ‘I am abiding in effacement. ’
mn8:4.4 | S: But in the training of the Noble One these are not called ‘self-effacement’; | T: But it is not these attainments that are called ‘effacement’ in the Noble One’s Discipline:
mn8:4.5 | S: they’re called ‘blissful meditations in this life’. | T: these are called ‘pleasant abidings here and now’ in the Noble One’s Discipline.
mn8:5.1 | S: It’s possible that some mendicant, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, might enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: “It is possible here that with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, some bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second jhāna, which has self-confidence and singleness of mind without applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of concentration.
mn8:5.2 | S: They might think | T: He might think thus:
mn8:5.3 | S: they’re practicing self-effacement. | T: ‘I am abiding in effacement.’
mn8:5.4 | S: But in the training of the Noble One these are not called ‘self-effacement’; | T: (none)
mn8:5.5 | S: they’re called ‘blissful meditations in this life’. | T: But…these are called ‘pleasant abidings here and now’ in the Noble One’s Discipline.
mn8:6.1 | S: It’s possible that some mendicant, with the fading away of rapture, might enter and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, experiencing for themselves the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’ | T: “It is possible here that with the fading away as well of rapture, some bhikkhu abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in the third jhāna, on account of which noble ones announce: ‘He has a pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.’
mn8:6.2 | S: They might think | T: He might think thus:
mn8:6.3 | S: they’re practicing self-effacement. | T: ‘I am abiding in effacement.’
mn8:6.4 | S: But in the training of the Noble One these are not called ‘self-effacement’; | T: (none)
mn8:6.5 | S: they’re called ‘blissful meditations in this life’. | T: But…these are called ‘pleasant abidings here and now’ in the Noble One’s Discipline.
mn8:7.1 | S: It’s possible that some mendicant, with the giving up of pleasure and pain, and the disappearance of former happiness and sadness, might enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. | T: “It is possible here that with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, some bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna, which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
mn8:7.2 | S: They might think | T: He might think thus:
mn8:7.3 | S: they’re practicing self-effacement. | T: ‘I am abiding in effacement.’
mn8:7.4 | S: But in the training of the Noble One these are not called ‘self-effacement’; | T: But it is not these attainments that are called ‘effacement’ in the Noble One’s Discipline:
mn8:7.5 | S: they’re called ‘blissful meditations in this life’. | T: these are called ‘pleasant abidings here and now’ in the Noble One’s Discipline.
mn8:8.1 | S: It’s possible that some mendicant, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite’, might enter and remain in the dimension of infinite space. | T: “It is possible here that with the complete surmounting of perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of sensory impact, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite,’ some bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infinite space.
mn8:8.2 | S: They might think | T: He might think thus:
mn8:8.3 | S: they’re practicing self-effacement. | T: ‘I am abiding in effacement.’
mn8:8.4 | S: But in the training of the Noble One these are not called ‘self-effacement’; | T: But it is not these attainments that are called ‘effacement’ in the Noble One’s Discipline:
mn8:8.5 | S: they’re called ‘peaceful meditations’. | T: these are called ‘peaceful abidings’ in the Noble One’s Discipline.
mn8:9.1 | S: It’s possible that some mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite’, might enter and remain in the dimension of infinite consciousness. | T: “It is possible here that by completely surmounting the base of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite,’ some bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infinite consciousness.
mn8:9.2 | S: They might think | T: He might think thus:
mn8:9.3 | S: they’re practicing self-effacement. | T: ‘I am abiding in effacement.’
mn8:9.4 | S: But in the training of the Noble One these are not called ‘self-effacement’; | T: (none)
mn8:9.5 | S: they’re called ‘peaceful meditations’. | T: But…these are called ‘peaceful abidings’ in the Noble One’s Discipline.
mn8:10.1 | S: It’s possible that some mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing at all’, might enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness. | T: “It is possible here that by completely surmounting the base of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing,’ some bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of nothingness.
mn8:10.2 | S: They might think | T: He might think thus:
mn8:10.3 | S: they’re practicing self-effacement. | T: ‘I am abiding in effacement.’
mn8:10.4 | S: But in the training of the Noble One these are not called ‘self-effacement’; | T: (none)
mn8:10.5 | S: they’re called ‘peaceful meditations’. | T: But…these are called ‘peaceful abidings’ in the Noble One’s Discipline.
mn8:11.1 | S: It’s possible that some mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, might enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. | T: “It is possible here that by completely surmounting the base of nothingness, some bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
mn8:11.2 | S: They might think | T: He might think thus:
mn8:11.3 | S: they’re practicing self-effacement. | T: ‘I am abiding in effacement.’
mn8:11.4 | S: But in the training of the Noble One these are not called ‘self-effacement’; | T: But these attainments are not called ‘effacement’ in the Noble One’s Discipline:
mn8:11.5 | S: they’re called ‘peaceful meditations’. | T: these are called ‘peaceful abidings’ in the Noble One’s Discipline.
mn8:12.0 | S: 1. The Exposition of Self-Effacement | T: Effacement
mn8:12.1 | S: Now in this regard, Cunda, you should work on self-effacement in each of the following ways. | T: “Now, Cunda, here effacement should be practised by you:
mn8:12.2 | S: ‘Others will be cruel, but here we will not be cruel.’ | T: (1) ‘Others will be cruel; we shall not be cruel here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.3 | S: ‘Others will kill living creatures, but here we will not kill living creatures.’ | T: (2) ‘Others will kill living beings; we shall abstain from killing living beings here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.4 | S: ‘Others will steal, but here we will not steal.’ | T: (3) ‘Others will take what is not given; we shall abstain from taking what is not given here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.5 | S: ‘Others will be unchaste, but here we will not be unchaste.’ | T: (4) ‘Others will be uncelibate; we shall be celibate here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.6 | S: ‘Others will lie, but here we will not lie.’ | T: (5) ‘Others will speak falsehood; we shall abstain from false speech here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.7 | S: ‘Others will backbite, but here we will not backbite.’ | T: (6) ‘Others will speak maliciously; we shall abstain from malicious speech here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.8 | S: ‘Others will speak harshly, but here we will not speak harshly.’ | T: (7) ‘Others will speak harshly; we shall abstain from harsh speech here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.9 | S: ‘Others will talk nonsense, but here we will not talk nonsense.’ | T: (8) ‘Others will gossip; we shall abstain from gossip here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.10 | S: ‘Others will be covetous, but here we will not be covetous.’ | T: (9) ‘Others will be covetous; we shall be uncovetous here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.11 | S: ‘Others will have ill will, but here we will not have ill will.’ | T: (10) ‘Others will have ill will; we shall be without ill will here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.12 | S: ‘Others will have wrong view, but here we will have right view.’ | T: (11) ‘Others will be of wrong view; we shall be of right view here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.13 | S: ‘Others will have wrong purpose, but here we will have right purpose.’ | T: (12) ‘Others will be of wrong intention; we shall be of right intention here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.14 | S: ‘Others will have wrong speech, but here we will have right speech.’ | T: (13) ‘Others will be of wrong speech; we shall be of right speech here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.15 | S: ‘Others will have wrong action, but here we will have right action.’ | T: (14) ‘Others will be of wrong action; we shall be of right action here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.16 | S: ‘Others will have wrong livelihood, but here we will have right livelihood.’ | T: (15) ‘Others will be of wrong livelihood; we shall be of right livelihood here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.17 | S: ‘Others will have wrong effort, but here we will have right effort.’ | T: (16) ‘Others will be of wrong effort; we shall be of right effort here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.18 | S: ‘Others will have wrong mindfulness, but here we will have right mindfulness.’ | T: (17) ‘Others will be of wrong mindfulness; we shall be of right mindfulness here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.19 | S: ‘Others will have wrong immersion, but here we will have right immersion.’ | T: (18) ‘Others will be of wrong concentration; we shall be of right concentration here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.20 | S: ‘Others will have wrong knowledge, but here we will have right knowledge.’ | T: (19) ‘Others will be of wrong knowledge; we shall be of right knowledge here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.21 | S: ‘Others will have wrong freedom, but here we will have right freedom.’ | T: (20) ‘Others will be of wrong deliverance; we shall be of right deliverance here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.22 | S: ‘Others will be overcome with dullness and drowsiness, but here we will be rid of dullness and drowsiness.’ | T: (21) ‘Others will be overcome by sloth and torpor; we shall be free from sloth and torpor here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.23 | S: ‘Others will be restless, but here we will not be restless.’ | T: (22) ‘Others will be restless; we shall not be restless here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.24 | S: ‘Others will have doubts, but here we will have gone beyond doubt.’ | T: (23) ‘Others will be doubters; we shall go beyond doubt here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.25 | S: ‘Others will be irritable, but here we will be without anger.’ | T: (24) ‘Others will be angry; we shall not be angry here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.26 | S: ‘Others will be acrimonious, but here we will be without acrimony.’ | T: (25) ‘Others will be resentful; we shall not be resentful here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.27 | S: ‘Others will be offensive, but here we will be inoffensive.’ | T: (26) ‘Others will be contemptuous; we shall not be contemptuous here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.28 | S: ‘Others will be contemptuous, but here we will be without contempt.’ | T: (27) ‘Others will be insolent; we shall not be insolent here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.29 | S: ‘Others will be jealous, but here we will be without jealousy.’ | T: (28) ‘Others will be envious; we shall not be envious here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.30 | S: ‘Others will be stingy, but here we will be without stinginess.’ | T: (29) ‘Others will be avaricious; we shall not be avaricious here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.31 | S: ‘Others will be devious, but here we will not be devious.’ | T: (30) ‘Others will be fraudulent; we shall not be fraudulent here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.32 | S: ‘Others will be deceitful, but here we will not be deceitful.’ | T: (31) ‘Others will be deceitful; we shall not be deceitful here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.33 | S: ‘Others will be pompous, but here we will not be pompous.’ | T: (32) ‘Others will be obstinate; we shall not be obstinate here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.34 | S: ‘Others will be arrogant, but here we will not be arrogant.’ | T: (33) ‘Others will be arrogant; we shall not be arrogant here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.35 | S: ‘Others will be hard to admonish, but here we will not be hard to admonish.’ | T: (34) ‘Others will be difficult to admonish; we shall be easy to admonish here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.36 | S: ‘Others will have bad friends, but here we will have good friends.’ | T: (35) ‘Others will have bad friends; we shall have good friends here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.37 | S: ‘Others will be negligent, but here we will be diligent.’ | T: (36) ‘Others will be negligent; we shall be diligent here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.38 | S: ‘Others will be faithless, but here we will have faith.’ | T: (37) ‘Others will be faithless; we shall be faithful here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.39 | S: ‘Others will be conscienceless, but here we will have a sense of conscience.’ | T: (38) ‘Others will be shameless; we shall be shameful here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.40 | S: ‘Others will be imprudent, but here we will be prudent.’ | T: (39) ‘Others will have no fear of wrongdoing; we shall be afraid of wrongdoing here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.41 | S: ‘Others will be unlearned, but here we will be well learned.’ | T: (40) ‘Others will be of little learning; we shall be of great learning here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.42 | S: ‘Others will be lazy, but here we will be energetic.’ | T: (41) ‘Others will be lazy; we shall be energetic here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.43 | S: ‘Others will be unmindful, but here we will be mindful.’ | T: (42) ‘Others will be unmindful; we shall be established in mindfulness here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.44 | S: ‘Others will be witless, but here we will be accomplished in wisdom.’ | T: (43) ‘Others will lack wisdom; we shall possess wisdom here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.45 | S: ‘Others will be attached to their own views, holding them tight, and refusing to let go, but here we will not be attached to our own views, not holding them tight, but will let them go easily.’ | T: (44) ‘Others will adhere to their own views, hold on to them tenaciously, and relinquish them with difficulty; we shall not adhere to our own views or hold on to them tenaciously, but shall relinquish them easily’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:13.0 | S: 2. Giving Rise to the Thought | T: Inclination of Mind
mn8:13.1 | S: Cunda, I say that even giving rise to the thought of skillful qualities is very helpful, let alone following that path in body and speech. | T: “Cunda, I say that even the inclination of mind towards wholesome states is of great benefit, so what should be said of bodily and verbal acts conforming to such a state of mind?
mn8:13.2 | S: That’s why you should give rise to the following thoughts. ‘Others will be cruel, but here we will not be cruel.’ | T: Therefore, Cunda: (1) Mind should be inclined thus: ‘Others will be cruel; we shall not be cruel here.’
mn8:13.3 | S: ‘Others will kill living creatures, but here we will not kill living creatures.’ … | T: (2) Mind should be inclined thus: ‘Others will kill living beings; we shall abstain from killing living beings here.’ (3–43) Mind should be inclined thus:…
mn8:13.4 | S: ‘Others will be attached to their own views, holding them tight, and refusing to let go, but here we will not be attached to our own views, not holding them tight, but will let them go easily.’ | T: (44) Mind should be inclined thus: ‘Others will adhere to their own views, hold on to them tenaciously, and relinquish them with difficulty; we shall not adhere to our own views or hold on to them tenaciously, but shall relinquish them easily.’
mn8:14.0 | S: 3. Bypassing | T: Avoidance
mn8:14.1 | S: Cunda, suppose there was a rough path and another smooth path to get around it. | T: “Cunda, suppose there were an uneven path and another even path by which to avoid it;
mn8:14.2 | S: Or suppose there was a rough ford and another smooth ford to get around it. | T: and suppose there were an uneven ford and another even ford by which to avoid it.
mn8:14.3 | S: In the same way, a cruel individual bypasses it by not being cruel. An individual who kills bypasses it by not killing. … | T: So too: (1) A person given to cruelty has non-cruelty by which to avoid it. (2) One given to killing living beings has abstention from killing living beings by which to avoid it. (3) One given to taking what is not given has abstention from taking what is not given by which to avoid it. (4) One given to be uncelibate has celibacy by which to avoid it. (5) One given to false speech has abstention from false speech by which to avoid it. (6) One given to malicious speech has abstention from malicious speech by which to avoid it. (7) One given to harsh speech has abstention from harsh speech by which to avoid it. (8) One given to gossip has abstention from gossip by which to avoid it. (9) One given to covetousness has uncovetousness by which to avoid it. (10) One given to ill will has non-ill will by which to avoid it.
mn8:14.4 | P: Micchādiṭṭhissa purisapuggalassa sammādiṭṭhi hoti parikkamanāya, micchāsaṅkappassa purisapuggalassa sammāsaṅkappo hoti parikkamanāya, micchāvācassa purisapuggalassa sammāvācā hoti parikkamanāya, micchākammantassa purisapuggalassa sammākammanto hoti parikkamanāya, micchāājīvassa purisapuggalassa sammāājīvo hoti parikkamanāya, micchāvāyāmassa purisapuggalassa sammāvāyāmo hoti parikkamanāya, micchāsatissa purisapuggalassa sammāsati hoti parikkamanāya, micchāsamādhissa purisapuggalassa sammāsamādhi hoti parikkamanāya, micchāñāṇissa purisapuggalassa sammāñāṇaṁ hoti parikkamanāya, micchāvimuttissa purisapuggalassa sammāvimutti hoti parikkamanāya. | T: (11) One given to wrong view has right view by which to avoid it. (12) One given to wrong intention has right intention by which to avoid it. (13) One given to wrong speech has right speech by which to avoid it. (14) One given to wrong action has right action by which to avoid it. (15) One given to wrong livelihood has right livelihood by which to avoid it. (16) One given to wrong effort has right effort by which to avoid it. (17) One given to wrong mindfulness has right mindfulness by which to avoid it. (18) One given to wrong concentration has right concentration by which to avoid it. (19) One given to wrong knowledge has right knowledge by which to avoid it. (20) One given to wrong deliverance has right deliverance by which to avoid it. (21) One given to sloth and torpor has freedom from sloth and torpor by which to avoid it. (22) One given to restlessness has non-restlessness by which to avoid it. (23) One given to doubt has the state beyond doubt by which to avoid it. (24) One given to anger has non-anger by which to avoid it. (25) One given to resentment has non-resentment by which to avoid it. (26) One given to contempt has non-contempt by which to avoid it. (27) One given to insolence has non-insolence by which to avoid it. (28) One given to envy has non-envy by which to avoid it. (29) One given to avarice has non-avarice by which to avoid it. (30) One given to fraud has non-fraud by which to avoid it. (31) One given to deceit has non-deceit by which to avoid it. (32) One given to obstinacy has non-obstinacy by which to avoid it. (33) One given to arrogance has non-arrogance by which to avoid it. (34) One given to being difficult to admonish has being easy to admonish by which to avoid it. (35) One given to making bad friends has making good friends by which to avoid it. (36) One given to negligence has diligence by which to avoid it. (37) One given to faithlessness has faith by which to avoid it. (38) One given to shamelessness has shame by which to avoid it. (39) One given to fearlessness of wrongdoing has fear of wrongdoing by which to avoid it. (40) One given to little learning has great learning by which to avoid it. (41) One given to laziness has the arousal of energy by which to avoid it. (42) One given to unmindfulness has the establishment of mindfulness by which to avoid it. (43) One given to lack of wisdom has the acquisition of wisdom by which to avoid it.
mn8:14.5 | S: An individual who is attached to their own views, holding them tight, and refusing to let go, gets around it by not being attached to their own views, not holding them tight, but letting them go easily. | T: (44) One given to adhere to his own views, who holds on to them tenaciously and relinquishes them with difficulty, has non-adherence to his own views, not holding on to them tenaciously and relinquishing them easily, by which to avoid it.
mn8:15.0 | S: 4. Going Up | T: The Way Leading Upwards
mn8:15.1 | S: Cunda, all unskillful qualities lead downwards, while all skillful qualities lead upwards. | T: “Cunda, just as all unwholesome states lead downwards and all wholesome states lead upwards,
mn8:15.2 | S: In the same way, a cruel individual is led upwards by not being cruel. An individual who kills is led upwards by not killing … | T: so too: (1) A person given to cruelty has non-cruelty to lead him upwards. (2) One given to killing living beings has abstention from killing living beings to lead him upwards.
mn8:15.3 | S: An individual who is attached to their own views, holding them tight, and refusing to let go, is led upwards by not being attached to their own views, not holding them tight, but letting them go easily. | T: (3–43) One given to…to lead him upwards. (44) One given to adhere to his own views, who holds on to them tenaciously and relinquishes them with difficulty, has non-adherence to his own views, not holding on to them tenaciously and relinquishing them easily, to lead him upwards.
mn8:16.0 | S: 5. The Exposition by Extinguishment | T: The Way of Extinguishing
mn8:16.1 | S: If you’re sinking in the mud yourself, Cunda, it is quite impossible for you to pull out someone else who is sinking in the mud. | T: “Cunda, that one who is himself sinking in the mud should pull out another who is sinking in the mud is impossible;
mn8:16.2 | S: But if you’re not sinking in the mud yourself, it is quite possible for you to pull out someone else who is sinking in the mud. | T: that one who is not himself sinking in the mud should pull out another who is sinking in the mud is possible.
mn8:16.3 | S: If you’re not tamed, trained, and quenched yourself, it is quite impossible for you to help tame, train, and extinguish someone else. | T: That one who is himself untamed, undisciplined, with defilements unextinguished, should tame another, discipline him, and help extinguish his defilements is impossible;
mn8:16.4 | S: But if you are tamed, trained, and quenched yourself, it is quite possible for you to help tame, train, and extinguish someone else. | T: that one who is himself tamed, disciplined, with defilements extinguished, should tame another, discipline him, and help extinguish his defilements is possible.
mn8:16.5 | S: In the same way, a cruel individual extinguishes it by not being cruel. An individual who kills extinguishes it by not killing. … | T: So too: (1) A person given to cruelty has non-cruelty by which to extinguish it. (2) One given to killing living beings has abstention from killing living beings by which to extinguish it.
mn8:16.6 | P: Adinnādāyissa purisapuggalassa adinnādānā veramaṇī hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (3–43) One given to… …by which to extinguish it.
mn8:16.7 | P: Abrahmacārissa purisapuggalassa abrahmacariyā veramaṇī hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.8 | P: Musāvādissa purisapuggalassa musāvādā veramaṇī hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.9 | P: Pisuṇavācassa purisapuggalassa pisuṇāya vācāya veramaṇī hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.10 | P: Pharusavācassa purisapuggalassa pharusāya vācāya veramaṇī hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.11 | P: Samphappalāpissa purisapuggalassa samphappalāpā veramaṇī hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.12 | P: Abhijjhālussa purisapuggalassa anabhijjhā hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.13 | P: Byāpannacittassa purisapuggalassa abyāpādo hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.14 | P: Micchādiṭṭhissa purisapuggalassa sammādiṭṭhi hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.15 | P: Micchāsaṅkappassa purisapuggalassa sammāsaṅkappo hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.16 | P: Micchāvācassa purisapuggalassa sammāvācā hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.17 | P: Micchākammantassa purisapuggalassa sammākammanto hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.18 | P: Micchāājīvassa purisapuggalassa sammāājīvo hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.19 | P: Micchāvāyāmassa purisapuggalassa sammāvāyāmo hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.20 | P: Micchāsatissa purisapuggalassa sammāsati hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.21 | P: Micchāsamādhissa purisapuggalassa sammāsamādhi hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.22 | P: Micchāñāṇissa purisapuggalassa sammāñāṇaṁ hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.23 | P: Micchāvimuttissa purisapuggalassa sammāvimutti hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.24 | P: Thinamiddhapariyuṭṭhitassa purisapuggalassa vigatathinamiddhatā hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.25 | P: Uddhatassa purisapuggalassa anuddhaccaṁ hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.26 | P: Vicikicchissa purisapuggalassa tiṇṇavicikicchatā hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.27 | P: Kodhanassa purisapuggalassa akkodho hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.28 | P: Upanāhissa purisapuggalassa anupanāho hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.29 | P: Makkhissa purisapuggalassa amakkho hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.30 | P: Paḷāsissa purisapuggalassa apaḷāso hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.31 | P: Issukissa purisapuggalassa anissukitā hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.32 | P: Maccharissa purisapuggalassa amacchariyaṁ hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.33 | P: Saṭhassa purisapuggalassa asāṭheyyaṁ hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.34 | P: Māyāvissa purisapuggalassa amāyā hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.35 | P: Thaddhassa purisapuggalassa atthaddhiyaṁ hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.36 | P: Atimānissa purisapuggalassa anatimāno hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.37 | P: Dubbacassa purisapuggalassa sovacassatā hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.38 | P: Pāpamittassa purisapuggalassa kalyāṇamittatā hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.39 | P: Pamattassa purisapuggalassa appamādo hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.40 | P: Assaddhassa purisapuggalassa saddhā hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.41 | P: Ahirikassa purisapuggalassa hirī hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.42 | P: Anottāpissa purisapuggalassa ottappaṁ hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.43 | P: Appassutassa purisapuggalassa bāhusaccaṁ hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.44 | P: Kusītassa purisapuggalassa vīriyārambho hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.45 | P: Muṭṭhassatissa purisapuggalassa upaṭṭhitassatitā hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.46 | P: Duppaññassa purisapuggalassa paññāsampadā hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (none)
mn8:16.47 | S: An individual who is attached to their own views, holding them tight, and refusing to let go, extinguishes it by not being attached to their own views, not holding them tight, but letting them go easily. | T: (44) One given to adhere to his own views, who holds on to them tenaciously and relinquishes them with difficulty, has non-adherence to his own views, not holding on to them tenaciously and relinquishing them easily, by which to extinguish it.
mn8:17.1 | S: So, Cunda, I’ve taught the expositions by way of self-effacement, arising of thought, bypassing, going up, and extinguishing. | T: Conclusion “So, Cunda, the way of effacement has been taught by me, the way of inclining the mind has been taught by me, the way of avoidance has been taught by me, the way leading upwards has been taught by me, and the way of extinguishing has been taught by me.
mn8:17.2 | S: Out of sympathy, I’ve done what a teacher should do who wants what’s best for their disciples. | T: “What should be done for his disciples out of compassion by a teacher who seeks their welfare and has compassion for them, that I have done for you, Cunda.
mn8:17.3 | S: Here are these roots of trees, and here are these empty huts. Practice absorption, Cunda! Don’t be negligent! Don’t regret it later! This is my instruction.” | T: There are these roots of trees, these empty huts. Meditate, Cunda, do not delay or else you will regret it later. This is our instruction to you.”
mn8:17.4 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: That is what the Blessed One said.
mn8:17.5 | S: Satisfied, Venerable Mahācunda approved what the Buddha said. | T: The venerable Mahā Cunda was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
mn8:17.6 | S: Forty-four items have been stated, | T: (none)
mn8:17.7 | S: organized into five sections. | T: (none)
mn8:17.8 | S: “Effacement” is the name of this discourse, | T: (none)
mn8:17.9 | S: which is deep as the ocean. | T: (none)
mn8:17.10 | P: Sallekhasuttaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ aṭṭhamaṁ. | T: (none)

