## mn9, continued
mn9:67.2 | P: ettāvatāpi kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako sammādiṭṭhi hoti, ujugatāssa diṭṭhi, dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato, āgato imaṁ saddhamman”ti. | T: In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
mn9:68.1 | S: Saying “Good, reverend,” those mendicants approved and agreed with what Sāriputta said. Then they asked another question: | T: Taints Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words. Then they asked him a further question:
mn9:68.2 | S: “But reverend, might there be another way to describe a noble disciple who has right view, whose view is correct, who has experiential confidence in the teaching, and has come to the true teaching?” | T: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view, whose view is straight, who has unwavering confidence in the Dhamma, and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—
mn9:69.1 | S: “There might, reverends. | T: “There might be, friends.
mn9:69.2 | S: A noble disciple understands defilement, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. | T: “When, friends, a noble disciple understands the taints, the origin of the taints, the cessation of the taints, and the way leading to the cessation of the taints,
mn9:69.3 | S: When they’ve done this, they’re defined as a noble disciple who has right view, whose view is correct, who has experiential confidence in the teaching, and has come to the true teaching. | T: in that way he is one of right view, whose view is straight, who has unwavering confidence in the Dhamma, and has arrived at this true Dhamma.
mn9:70.1 | S: But what is defilement? What is its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation? | T: “And what are the taints, what is the origin of the taints, what is the cessation of the taints, what is the way leading to the cessation of the taints?
mn9:70.2 | S: There are these three defilements. | T: There are these three taints:
mn9:70.3 | S: The defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. | T: the taint of sensual desire, the taint of being, and the taint of ignorance.
mn9:70.4 | S: Defilement originates from ignorance. Defilement ceases when ignorance ceases. The practice that leads to the cessation of defilement is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: | T: With the arising of ignorance there is the arising of the taints. With the cessation of ignorance there is the cessation of the taints. The way leading to the cessation of the taints is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is,
mn9:70.5 | S: right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. | T: right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
mn9:71.1 | S: A noble disciple understands in this way defilement, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. They’ve completely given up the underlying tendency to greed, dispelled the underlying tendency to aversion, and eradicated the underlying tendency to the view and conceit ‘I am’. They’ve given up ignorance and given rise to knowledge, and make an end of suffering in this very life. | T: “When a noble disciple has thus understood the taints, the origin of the taints, the cessation of the taints, and the way leading to the cessation of the taints, he entirely abandons the underlying tendency to lust, he abolishes the underlying tendency to aversion, he extirpates the underlying tendency to the view and conceit ‘I am,’ and by abandoning ignorance and arousing true knowledge he here and now makes an end of suffering.
mn9:71.2 | S: When they’ve done this, they’re defined as a noble disciple who has right view, whose view is correct, who has experiential confidence in the teaching, and has come to the true teaching.” | T: In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view, whose view is straight, who has unwavering confidence in the Dhamma, and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
mn9:71.3 | S: That is what Venerable Sāriputta said. | T: That is what the venerable Sāriputta said.
mn9:71.4 | S: Satisfied, the mendicants approved what Sāriputta said. | T: The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the venerable Sāriputta’s words.
mn9:71.5 | P: Sammādiṭṭhisuttaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ navamaṁ. | T: (none)

## mn104
mn104:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
mn104:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans near the village of Sāma. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was living in the Sakyan country at Sāmagāma.
mn104:2.1 | S: Now at that time the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan had recently passed away at Pāvā. | T: Now on that occasion the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta had just died at Pāvā.
mn104:2.2 | S: With his passing the Jain ascetics split, dividing into two factions, fighting, quarreling, and disputing, continually wounding each other with barbed words: | T: On his death the Nigaṇṭhas divided, split into two; and they had taken to quarrelling and brawling and were deep in disputes, stabbing each other with verbal daggers:
mn104:2.3 | S: “You don’t understand this teaching and training. I understand this teaching and training. What, you understand this teaching and training? You’re practicing wrong. I’m practicing right. I stay on topic, you don’t. You said last what you should have said first. You said first what you should have said last. What you’ve thought so much about has been disproved. Your doctrine is refuted. Go on, save your doctrine! You’re trapped; get yourself out of this—if you can!” | T: “You do not understand this Dhamma and Discipline. I understand this Dhamma and Discipline. How could you understand this Dhamma and Discipline? Your way is wrong. My way is right. I am consistent. You are inconsistent. What should have been said first you said last. What should have been said last you said first. What you had so carefully thought up has been turned inside out. Your assertion has been shown up. You are refuted. Go and learn better, or disentangle yourself if you can!”
mn104:2.4 | S: You’d think there was nothing but slaughter going on among the Jain ascetics. | T: It seemed as if there were nothing but slaughter among the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta’s pupils.
mn104:2.5 | S: And the Jain Ñātika’s white-clothed lay disciples were disillusioned, dismayed, and disappointed in the Jain ascetics. They were equally disappointed with a teaching and training so poorly explained and poorly propounded, not emancipating, not leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha, with broken monument and without a refuge. | T: And his white-clothed lay disciples were disgusted, dismayed, and disappointed with the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta’s pupils, as they were with his badly proclaimed and badly expounded Dhamma and Discipline, which was unemancipating, unconducive to peace, expounded by one not fully enlightened, and was now with its shrine broken, left without a refuge.
mn104:3.1 | S: And then, after completing the rainy season residence near Pāvā, the novice Cunda went to see Venerable Ānanda at Sāma village. He bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. | T: Then the novice Cunda, who had spent the Rains at Pāvā, went to the venerable Ānanda, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and told him what was taking place.
mn104:3.2 | P: “nigaṇṭho, bhante, nāṭaputto pāvāyaṁ adhunākālaṅkato. | T: (none)
mn104:3.3 | P: Tassa kālaṅkiriyāya bhinnā nigaṇṭhā dvedhikajātā …pe… bhinnathūpe appaṭisaraṇe”ti. | T: (none)
mn104:4.1 | S: Ānanda said to him, | T: The venerable Ānanda then said to the novice Cunda:
mn104:4.2 | S: “Reverend Cunda, we should see the Buddha about this matter. | T: “Friend Cunda, this is news that should be told to the Blessed One.
mn104:4.3 | S: Come, let’s go to the Buddha and inform him about this.” | T: Come, let us approach the Blessed One and tell him this.”
mn104:4.4 | S: “Yes, sir,” replied Cunda. | T: “Yes, venerable sir,” the novice Cunda replied.
mn104:4.5 | S: Then Ānanda and Cunda went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and Ānanda informed him of what Cunda had said. He went on to say, | T: Then the venerable Ānanda and the novice Cunda went together to the Blessed One. After paying homage to him, they sat down at one side, and the venerable Ānanda said to the Blessed One:
mn104:4.6 | P: “ayaṁ, bhante, cundo samaṇuddeso evamāha: | T: “This novice Cunda, venerable sir, says thus:
mn104:4.7 | P: ‘nigaṇṭho, bhante, nāṭaputto pāvāyaṁ adhunākālaṅkato. | T: ‘Venerable sir, the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta has just died.
mn104:4.8 | P: Tassa kālaṅkiriyāya bhinnā nigaṇṭhā dvedhikajātā …pe… bhinnathūpe appaṭisaraṇe’ti. | T: On his death the Nigaṇṭhas divided, split into two…and is now with its shrine broken, left without a refuge.’
mn104:4.9 | S: “Sir, it occurs to me: | T: I thought, venerable sir:
mn104:4.10 | S: ‘When the Buddha has passed away, let no dispute arise in the Saṅgha. | T: ‘Let no dispute arise in the Sangha when the Blessed One has gone.
mn104:4.11 | S: For such a dispute would be for the detriment and unhappiness of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans.’” | T: For such a dispute would be for the harm and unhappiness of many, for the loss, harm, and suffering of gods and humans.’”
mn104:5.1 | S: “What do you think, Ānanda? | T: “What do you think, Ānanda?
mn104:5.2 | S: Do you see even two mendicants whose opinion differs regarding the things I have taught from my direct knowledge, that is, | T: These things that I have taught you after directly knowing them—that is,
mn104:5.3 | S: the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, the four right efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven awakening factors, and the noble eightfold path?” | T: the four foundations of mindfulness, the four right kinds of striving, the four bases for spiritual power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven enlightenment factors, the Noble Eightfold Path—do you see, Ānanda, even two bhikkhus who make differing assertions about these things?”
mn104:5.4 | S: “No, sir, I do not. | T: “No, venerable sir,
mn104:5.5 | P: cattāro satipaṭṭhānā cattāro sammappadhānā cattāro iddhipādā pañcindriyāni pañca balāni satta bojjhaṅgā ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo, nāhaṁ passāmi imesu dhammesu dvepi bhikkhū nānāvāde. | T: I do not see even two bhikkhus who make differing assertions about these things.
mn104:5.6 | S: Nevertheless, there are some individuals who appear to live obedient to the Buddha, but when the Buddha has passed away they might create a dispute in the Saṅgha regarding livelihood or the monastic code. | T: But, venerable sir, there are people who live deferential towards the Blessed One who might, when he has gone, create a dispute in the Sangha about livelihood and about the Pātimokkha.
mn104:5.7 | S: Such a dispute would be for the detriment and unhappiness of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans.” | T: Such a dispute would be for the harm and unhappiness of many, for the loss, harm, and suffering of gods and humans.”
mn104:5.8 | S: “Ānanda, dispute about livelihood or the monastic code is a minor matter. | T: “A dispute about livelihood or about the Pātimokkha would be trifling, Ānanda.
mn104:5.9 | S: But should a dispute arise in the Saṅgha concerning the path or the practice, that would be for the detriment and unhappiness of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. | T: But should a dispute arise in the Sangha about the path or the way, such a dispute would be for the harm and unhappiness of many, for the loss, harm, and suffering of gods and humans.
mn104:6.1 | S: Ānanda, there are these six roots of dispute. | T: “There are, Ānanda, these six roots of disputes.
mn104:6.2 | S: What six? | T: What six?
mn104:6.3 | S: Firstly, a mendicant is irritable and acrimonious. | T: Here, Ānanda, a bhikkhu is angry and resentful.
mn104:6.4 | S: Such a mendicant lacks respect and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and they don’t fulfill the training. | T: Such a bhikkhu dwells disrespectful and undeferential towards the Teacher, towards the Dhamma, and towards the Sangha, and he does not fulfil the training.
mn104:6.5 | S: They create a dispute in the Saṅgha, which is for the detriment and unhappiness of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. | T: A bhikkhu who dwells disrespectful and undeferential towards the Teacher, towards the Dhamma, and towards the Sangha, and who does not fulfil the training, creates a dispute in the Sangha, which would be for the harm and unhappiness of many, for the loss, harm, and suffering of gods and humans.
mn104:6.6 | S: If you see such a root of dispute in yourselves or others, you should try to give up this bad thing. | T: Now if you see any such root of dispute either in yourselves or externally, you should strive to abandon that same evil root of dispute.
mn104:6.7 | S: If you don’t see it, you should practice so that it doesn’t come up in the future. | T: And if you do not see any such root of dispute either in yourselves or externally, you should practise in such a way that that same evil root of dispute does not erupt in the future.
mn104:6.8 | S: That’s how to give up this bad root of dispute, so it doesn’t come up in the future. | T: Thus there is the abandoning of that evil root of dispute; thus there is the non-eruption of that evil root of dispute in the future.
mn104:7-11.1 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant is offensive and contemptuous … | T: “Again, a bhikkhu is contemptuous and insolent…
mn104:7-11.2 | S: They’re jealous and stingy … | T: envious and avaricious…
mn104:7-11.3 | S: They’re devious and deceitful … | T: fraudulent and deceitful…
mn104:7-11.4 | S: They have corrupt wishes and wrong view … | T: has evil wishes and wrong view…
mn104:7-11.5 | S: They’re attached to their own views, holding them tight, and refusing to let go. | T: adheres to his own views, holds on to them tenaciously, and relinquishes them with difficulty.
mn104:7-11.6 | S: Such a mendicant lacks respect and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and they don’t fulfill the training. | T: Such a bhikkhu dwells disrespectful and undeferential towards the Teacher, towards the Dhamma, and towards the Sangha, and he does not fulfil the training.
mn104:7-11.7 | S: They create a dispute in the Saṅgha, which is for the detriment and unhappiness of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. | T: A bhikkhu who dwells disrespectful and undeferential towards the Teacher, towards the Dhamma, and towards the Sangha, and who does not fulfil the training, creates a dispute in the Sangha, which would be for the harm and unhappiness of many, for the loss, harm, and suffering of gods and humans.
mn104:7-11.8 | S: If you see such a root of dispute in yourselves or others, you should try to give up this bad thing. | T: Now if you see any such root of dispute either in yourselves or externally, you should strive to abandon that same evil root of dispute.
mn104:7-11.9 | S: If you don’t see it, you should practice so that it doesn’t come up in the future. | T: And if you do not see any such root of dispute either in yourselves or externally, you should practise in such a way that that same evil root of dispute does not erupt in the future.
mn104:7-11.10 | S: That’s how to give up this bad root of dispute, so it doesn’t come up in the future. | T: Thus there is the abandoning of that evil root of dispute; thus there is the non-eruption of that evil root of dispute in the future.
mn104:7-11.11 | S: These are the six roots of dispute. | T: These are the six roots of dispute.
mn104:12.1 | S: There are four kinds of disciplinary issues. | T: “Ānanda, there are these four kinds of litigation.
mn104:12.2 | S: What four? | T: What four?
mn104:12.3 | S: Disciplinary issues due to disputes, accusations, offenses, or business. | T: Litigation because of a dispute, litigation because of an accusation, litigation because of an offence, and litigation concerning proceedings.
mn104:12.4 | S: These are the four kinds of disciplinary issues. | T: These are the four kinds of litigation.
mn104:13.1 | S: There are these seven means of settling any disciplinary issues that might arise. | T: “Ānanda, there are these seven kinds of settlement of litigation. For the settlement and pacification of litigations whenever they arise:
mn104:13.2 | S: Resolution face-to-face to be applied. Resolution through recollection to be granted. Resolution because of past insanity to be granted. Acting according to what has been admitted. Majority decision. Further penalty. Covering over as if with grass. | T: removal of litigation by confrontation may be provided, removal of litigation on account of memory may be provided, removal of litigation on account of past insanity may be provided, the effecting of acknowledgement of an offence, the opinion of the majority, the pronouncement of bad character against someone, and covering over with grass.
mn104:14.1 | S: And how is there resolution face-to-face? | T: “And how is there removal of litigation by confrontation?
mn104:14.2 | S: It’s when mendicants are disputing: ‘This is the teaching,’ ‘This is not the teaching,’ ‘This is the monastic law,’ ‘This is not the monastic law.’ | T: Here bhikkhus are disputing: ‘It is Dhamma,’ or ‘It is not Dhamma,’ or ‘It is Discipline,’ or ‘It is not Discipline.’
mn104:14.3 | S: Those mendicants should all sit together in harmony | T: Those bhikkhus should all meet together in concord.
mn104:14.4 | S: and thoroughly go over the guidelines of the teaching. | T: Then, having met together, the guideline of the Dhamma should be drawn out.
mn104:14.5 | S: They should settle that disciplinary issue in agreement with the guidelines. | T: Once the guideline of the Dhamma has been drawn out, that litigation should be settled in a way that accords with it.
mn104:14.6 | S: That’s how there is resolution face-to-face. | T: Such is the removal of litigation by confrontation.
mn104:14.7 | S: And that’s how certain disciplinary issues are settled, that is, | T: And so there comes to be the settlement of some litigations here
mn104:14.8 | S: by resolution face-to-face. | T: by removal of litigation by confrontation.
mn104:15.1 | S: And how is there majority decision? | T: “And how is there the opinion of a majority?
mn104:15.2 | S: If those mendicants are not able to settle that issue in that monastery, | T: If those bhikkhus cannot settle that litigation in that dwelling place,
mn104:15.3 | S: they should go to another monastery with more mendicants. | T: they should go to a dwelling place where there is a greater number of bhikkhus.
mn104:15.4 | S: There they should all sit together in harmony | T: There they should all meet together in concord.
mn104:15.5 | S: and thoroughly go over the guidelines of the teaching. | T: Then, having met together, the guideline of the Dhamma should be drawn out.
mn104:15.6 | S: They should settle that disciplinary issue in agreement with the guidelines. | T: Once the guideline of the Dhamma has been drawn out, that litigation should be settled in a way that accords with it.
mn104:15.7 | S: That’s how there is majority decision. And that’s how certain disciplinary issues are settled, that is, | T: Such is the opinion of a majority. And so there comes to be the settlement of some litigations here
mn104:15.8 | S: by majority decision. | T: by the opinion of a majority.
mn104:16.1 | S: And how is there resolution through recollection? | T: “And how is there removal of litigation on account of memory?
mn104:16.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant accuses a mendicant of a heavy offense; one entailing expulsion, or close to it: | T: Here one bhikkhu reproves another bhikkhu for such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat:
mn104:16.3 | S: ‘Venerable, do you recall committing the kind of serious offense that entails expulsion or close to it?’ | T: ‘Does the venerable one remember having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat?’
mn104:16.4 | S: They say: | T: He says:
mn104:16.5 | S: ‘No, reverend, I don’t recall committing such an offense.’ | T: ‘I do not, friends, remember having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat.’
mn104:16.6 | S: The resolution through recollection should be granted to them. | T: In his case removal of litigation on account of memory should be pronounced.
mn104:16.7 | S: That’s how there is the resolution through recollection. And that’s how certain disciplinary issues are settled, that is, | T: Such is the removal of litigation on account of memory. And so there comes to be the settlement of some litigations here
mn104:16.8 | S: by resolution through recollection. | T: by removal of litigation on account of memory.
mn104:17.1 | S: And how is there resolution because of past insanity? | T: “And how is there removal of litigation on account of past insanity?
mn104:17.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant accuses a mendicant of the kind of serious offense that entails expulsion, or close to it: | T: Here one bhikkhu reproves another bhikkhu for such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat:
mn104:17.3 | S: ‘Venerable, do you recall committing the kind of serious offense that entails expulsion or close to it?’ | T: ‘Does the venerable one remember having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat?’
mn104:17.4 | S: They say: | T: He says:
mn104:17.5 | S: ‘No, reverend, I don’t recall committing such an offense.’ | T: ‘I do not, friends, remember having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat.’
mn104:17.6 | S: But though they try to get out of it, the mendicant pursues the issue: | T: Despite the denial, the former presses the latter further:
mn104:17.7 | S: ‘Surely the venerable must know perfectly well if you recall committing an offense that entails expulsion or close to it!’ | T: ‘Surely the venerable one must know quite well if he remembers having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat?’
mn104:17.8 | S: They say: | T: He says:
mn104:17.9 | S: ‘Reverend, I had gone mad, I was out of my mind. | T: ‘I had gone mad, friend, I was out of my mind,
mn104:17.10 | S: And while I was mad I did and said many things that are not proper for an ascetic. | T: and when I was mad I said and did many things improper for a recluse.
mn104:17.11 | S: I don’t remember any of that, | T: I do not remember,
mn104:17.12 | S: I was mad when I did it.’ | T: I was mad when I did that.’
mn104:17.13 | S: The resolution because of past insanity should be granted to them. | T: In his case removal of litigation on account of past insanity should be pronounced.
mn104:17.14 | S: That’s how there is resolution because of past insanity. And that’s how certain disciplinary issues are settled, that is, | T: Such is the removal of litigation on account of past insanity. And so there comes to be the settlement of some litigations here
mn104:17.15 | S: by resolution because of past insanity. | T: by removal of litigation on account of past insanity.
mn104:18.1 | S: And how is there acting according to what has been admitted? | T: “And how is there the effecting of acknowledgement of an offence?
mn104:18.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant, whether accused or not, recalls an offense and clarifies it and reveals it. | T: Here a bhikkhu, whether reproved or unreproved, remembers an offence, reveals it, and discloses it.
mn104:18.3 | S: After approaching a more senior mendicant, that mendicant should arrange his robe over one shoulder, bow to that mendicant’s feet, squat on their heels, raise their cupped palms, and say: | T: He should go to a senior bhikkhu, and after arranging his robe on one shoulder, he should pay homage at his feet. Then, sitting on his heels, he should raise his hands palms together and say:
mn104:18.4 | S: ‘Sir, I have fallen into such-and-such an offense. I confess it.’ | T: ‘Venerable sir, I have committed such and such an offence; I confess it.’
mn104:18.5 | S: The senior mendicant says: | T: The other says:
mn104:18.6 | S: ‘Do you see it?’ | T: ‘Do you see?’—
mn104:18.7 | S: ‘Yes, I see it.’ | T: ‘Yes, I see.’—
mn104:18.8 | S: ‘Then restrain yourself in future.’ | T: ‘Will you practise restraint in the future?’—
mn104:18.9 | S: ‘I shall restrain myself.’ | T: ‘I will practise restraint in the future.’
mn104:18.10 | S: That’s how there is acting according to what has been admitted. And that’s how certain disciplinary issues are settled, that is, | T: Such is the effecting of acknowledgement of an offence. And so there comes to be the settlement of some litigations here
mn104:18.11 | S: by acting according to what has been admitted. | T: by the effecting of acknowledgement of an offence.
mn104:19.1 | S: And how is there a verdict of further penalty? | T: “And how is there the pronouncement of bad character against someone?
mn104:19.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant accuses a mendicant of the kind of heavy offense that entails expulsion, or close to it: | T: Here one bhikkhu reproves another for such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat:
mn104:19.3 | S: ‘Venerable, do you recall committing the kind of heavy offense that entails expulsion or close to it?’ | T: ‘Does the venerable one remember having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat?’
mn104:19.4 | S: They say: | T: He says:
mn104:19.5 | S: ‘No, reverend, I don’t recall committing such an offense.’ | T: ‘I do not, friends, remember having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat.’
mn104:19.6 | S: But though they try to get out of it, the mendicant pursues the issue: | T: Despite the denial, the former presses the latter further:
mn104:19.7 | S: ‘Surely the venerable must know perfectly well if you recall committing an offense that entails expulsion or close to it!’ | T: ‘Surely the venerable one must know quite well if he remembers having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat?’
mn104:19.8 | S: They say: | T: He says:
mn104:19.9 | S: ‘Reverend, I don’t recall committing a heavy offense of that nature. | T: ‘I do not, friends, remember having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat.
mn104:19.10 | S: But I do recall committing a light offense.’ | T: But, friends, I remember having committed such and such a minor offence.’
mn104:19.11 | S: But though they try to get out of it, the mendicant pursues the issue: | T: Despite the denial, the former presses the latter further:
mn104:19.12 | S: ‘Surely the venerable must know perfectly well if you recall committing an offense that entails expulsion or close to it!’ | T: ‘Surely the venerable one must know quite well if he remembers having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat?’
mn104:19.13 | S: They say: | T: He says:
mn104:19.14 | S: ‘Reverend, I’ll go so far as to admit this light offense even when not asked. | T: ‘Friends, when not asked I acknowledge having committed this minor offence;
mn104:19.15 | S: Why wouldn’t I admit a heavy offense when asked?’ | T: so when asked, why shouldn’t I acknowledge having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat?’
mn104:19.16 | S: They say: | T: The other says:
mn104:19.17 | S: ‘You wouldn’t have admitted that light offense without being asked, so why would you admit a heavy offense? | T: ‘Friend, if you had not been asked, you would not have acknowledged committing this minor offence; so why, when asked, would you acknowledge having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat?
mn104:19.18 | S: Surely the venerable must know perfectly well if you recall committing an offense that entails expulsion or close to it!’ | T: Surely the venerable one must know quite well if he remembers having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat?’
mn104:19.19 | S: They say: | T: He says:
mn104:19.20 | S: ‘Reverend, I do recall committing the kind of heavy offense that entails expulsion or close to it. | T: ‘I remember, friends, having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat.
mn104:19.21 | S: I spoke too hastily when I said | T: I was joking, I was raving, when I said that I did not remember having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat.’
mn104:19.22 | S: that I didn’t recall it.’ | T: (none)
mn104:19.23 | S: That’s how there is further penalty. And that’s how certain disciplinary issues are settled, that is, | T: Such is the pronouncement of bad character against someone. And so there comes to be the settlement of some litigations here
mn104:19.24 | S: by further penalty. | T: by the pronouncement of bad character against someone.
mn104:20.1 | S: And how is there the covering over as if with grass? | T: “And how is there covering over with grass?
mn104:20.2 | S: It’s when the mendicants continually fight, quarrel, and dispute, doing and saying many things that are not proper for an ascetic. | T: Here when bhikkhus have taken to quarreling and brawling and are deep in disputes, they may have said and done many things improper for a recluse.
mn104:20.3 | S: Those mendicants should all sit together in harmony. | T: Those bhikkhus should all meet together in concord.
mn104:20.4 | S: A competent mendicant of one party, having risen from their seat, arranged their robe over one shoulder, and raised their cupped palms, should inform the Saṅgha: | T: When they have met together, a wise bhikkhu among the bhikkhus who side together on the one part should rise from his seat, and after arranging his robe on one shoulder, he should raise his hands, palms together, and call for an enactment of the Sangha thus:
mn104:20.5 | S: ‘Sir, let the Saṅgha listen to me. | T: ‘Let the venerable Sangha hear me.
mn104:20.6 | S: We have been continually fighting, quarreling, and disputing, doing and saying many things that are not proper for an ascetic. | T: When we took to quarreling and brawling and were deep in disputes, we said and did many things improper for a recluse.
mn104:20.7 | S: If it seems appropriate to the Saṅgha, then—for the benefit of these venerables and myself—I disclose in the middle of the Saṅgha by means of covering over as if with grass any offenses committed by these venerables and by myself, excepting only those that are gravely blameworthy and those connected with laypeople.’ | T: If it is approved by the Sangha, then for the good of these venerable ones and for my own good, in the midst of the Sangha I shall confess, by the method of covering over with grass, any offences of these venerable ones and any offences of my own, except for those which call for serious censure and those connected with the laity.’
mn104:20.8 | S: Then a competent mendicant of the other party, having risen from their seat, arranged their robe over one shoulder, and raising their cupped palms, should inform the Saṅgha: | T: “Then a wise bhikkhu among the bhikkhus who side together on the other part should rise from his seat, and after arranging his robe on one shoulder, he should raise his hands, palms together, and call for an enactment of the Sangha thus:
mn104:20.9 | S: ‘Sir, let the Saṅgha listen to me. | T: ‘Let the venerable Sangha hear me.
mn104:20.10 | S: We have been continually fighting, quarreling, and disputing, doing and saying many things that are not proper for an ascetic. | T: When we took to quarreling and brawling and were deep in disputes, we said and did many things improper for a recluse.
mn104:20.11 | S: If it seems appropriate to the Saṅgha, then—for the benefit of these venerables and myself—I disclose in the middle of the Saṅgha by means of covering over as if with grass any offenses committed by these venerables and by myself, excepting only those that are gravely blameworthy and those connected with laypeople.’ | T: If it is approved by the Sangha, then for the good of these venerable ones and for my own good, in the midst of the Sangha I shall confess, by the method of covering over with grass, any offences of these venerable ones and any offences of my own, except for those which call for serious censure and those connected with the laity.’
mn104:20.12 | S: That’s how there is the covering over as if with grass. And that’s how certain disciplinary issues are settled, that is, | T: Such is the covering over with grass. And so there comes to be the settlement of some litigations here by the covering over with grass.
mn104:20.13 | S: by covering over as if with grass. | T: (none)
mn104:21.1 | S: Ānanda, these six warm-hearted qualities make for fondness and respect, conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without quarreling. | T: “Ānanda, there are these six principles of cordiality that create love and respect, and conduce to cohesion, to non-dispute, to concord, and to unity.
mn104:21.2 | S: What six? | T: What are the six?
mn104:21.3 | S: Firstly, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions with bodily kindness, both in public and in private. | T: “Here a bhikkhu maintains bodily acts of loving-kindness both in public and in private towards his companions in the holy life.
mn104:21.4 | S: This warm-hearted quality makes for fondness and respect, conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without dispute. | T: This is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect, and conduces to cohesion, to non-dispute, to concord, and to unity.
mn104:21.5 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions with verbal kindness … | T: “Again, a bhikkhu maintains verbal acts of loving-kindness both in public and in private towards his companions in the holy life.
mn104:21.6 | S: This too is a warm-hearted quality. | T: This too is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect, and conduces to…unity.
mn104:21.7 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions with mental kindness … | T: “Again, a bhikkhu maintains mental acts of loving-kindness both in public and in private towards his companions in the holy life.
mn104:21.8 | S: This too is a warm-hearted quality. | T: This too is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect, and conduces to…unity.
mn104:21.9 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant shares without reservation any material things they have gained by legitimate means, even the food placed in the alms-bowl, using them in common with their ethical spiritual companions. | T: “Again, a bhikkhu enjoys things in common with his virtuous companions in the holy life; without making reservations, he shares with them any gain of a kind that accords with the Dhamma and has been obtained in a way that accords with the Dhamma, including even what is in his bowl.
mn104:21.10 | S: This too is a warm-hearted quality. | T: This too is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect, and conduces to…unity.
mn104:21.11 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant lives according to the precepts shared with their spiritual companions, both in public and in private. Those precepts are intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. | T: “Again, a bhikkhu dwells both in public and in private possessing in common with his companions in the holy life those virtues that are unbroken, untorn, unblotched, unmottled, liberating, commended by the wise, not misapprehended, and conducive to concentration.
mn104:21.12 | S: This too is a warm-hearted quality. | T: This too is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect and conduces to…unity.
mn104:21.13 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant lives according to the view shared with their spiritual companions, both in public and in private. That view is noble and emancipating, and delivers one who applies it to the complete ending of suffering. | T: “Again, a bhikkhu dwells both in public and in private possessing in common with his companions in the holy life that view that is noble and emancipating, and leads the one who practises in accordance with it to the complete destruction of suffering.
mn104:21.14 | S: This too is a warm-hearted quality. | T: This too is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect, and conduces to cohesion, to non-dispute, to concord, and to unity.
mn104:21.15 | S: These six warm-hearted qualities make for fondness and respect, conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without dispute. | T: “These are the six principles of cordiality that create love and respect, and conduce to cohesion, to non-dispute, to concord, and to unity.
mn104:22.1 | S: If you should proceed having undertaken these six warm-hearted qualities, do you see any criticism, large or small, that you could not endure?” | T: “If, Ānanda, you undertake and maintain these six principles of cordiality, do you see any course of speech, trivial or gross, that you could not endure?”—
mn104:22.2 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “No, venerable sir.”—
mn104:22.3 | S: “That’s why, Ānanda, you should proceed having undertaken these six warm-hearted qualities. | T: “Therefore, Ānanda, undertake and maintain these six principles of cordiality.
mn104:22.4 | S: That will be for your lasting welfare and happiness.” | T: That will lead to your welfare and happiness for a long time.”
mn104:22.5 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: That is what the Blessed One said.
mn104:22.6 | S: Satisfied, Venerable Ānanda approved what the Buddha said. | T: The venerable Ānanda was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
mn104:22.7 | P: Sāmagāmasuttaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ catutthaṁ. | T: (none)

## mn57
mn57:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
mn57:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Koliyans, where they have a town named Haliddavasana. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was living in the Koliyan country where there was a town of the Koliyans named Haliddavasana.
mn57:2.1 | S: Then Puṇṇa the Koliyan, a cow votary, and the naked ascetic Seniya, a dog votary, went to the Buddha. Puṇṇa bowed to the Buddha and sat down to one side, while Seniya exchanged greetings and polite conversation with him before sitting down to one side curled up like a dog. | T: Then Puṇṇa, son of the Koliyans, an ox-duty ascetic, and also Seniya, a naked dog-duty ascetic, went to the Blessed One. Puṇṇa, the ox-duty ascetic, paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down at one side, while Seniya, the naked dog-duty ascetic, exchanged greetings with the Blessed One, and when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he too sat down at one side curled up like a dog.
mn57:2.2 | S: Puṇṇa said to the Buddha, | T: Puṇṇa, the ox-duty ascetic, said to the Blessed One:
mn57:2.3 | S: “Sir, this naked ascetic Seniya the dog votary does a hard thing: he eats food placed on the ground. | T: “Venerable sir, this Seniya is a naked dog-duty ascetic who does what is hard to do: he eats his food when it is thrown to the ground.
mn57:2.4 | S: For a long time he has undertaken that observance to behave like a dog. | T: He has long taken up and practised that dog-duty.
mn57:2.5 | S: Where will he be reborn in his next life?” | T: What will be his destination? What will be his future course?”
mn57:2.6 | S: “Enough, Puṇṇa, let it be. Don’t ask me that.” | T: “Enough, Puṇṇa, let that be. Do not ask me that.”
mn57:2.7 | S: For a second time … | T: A second time…
mn57:2.8 | S: and a third time, Puṇṇa said to the Buddha, | T: And a third time Puṇṇa, the ox-duty ascetic, said to the Blessed One:
mn57:2.9 | S: “Sir, this naked ascetic Seniya does a hard thing: he eats food placed on the ground. | T: “Venerable sir, this Seniya is a naked dog-duty ascetic who does what is hard to do: he eats his food when it is thrown to the ground.
mn57:2.10 | S: For a long time he has undertaken that observance to behave like a dog. | T: He has long taken up and practised that dog-duty.
mn57:2.11 | S: Where will he be reborn in his next life?” | T: What will be his destination? What will be his future course?”
mn57:2.12 | S: “Clearly, Puṇṇa, I’m not getting through to you when I say: | T: “Well, Puṇṇa, since I certainly cannot persuade you when I say:
mn57:2.13 | S: ‘Enough, Puṇṇa, let it be. Don’t ask me that.’ | T: ‘Enough, Puṇṇa, let that be. Do not ask me that,’
mn57:2.14 | S: Nevertheless, I will answer you. | T: I shall therefore answer you.
mn57:3.1 | S: Take someone who develops the dog observance fully and uninterruptedly. They develop a dog’s ethics, a dog’s mentality, and a dog’s behavior fully and uninterruptedly. | T: “Here, Puṇṇa, someone develops the dog-duty fully and uninterruptedly; he develops the dog-habit fully and uninterruptedly; he develops the dog-mind fully and uninterruptedly; he develops dog-behaviour fully and uninterruptedly.
mn57:3.2 | S: When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the company of dogs. | T: Having done so, on the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in the company of dogs.
mn57:3.3 | S: But if they have such a view: ‘By this precept or observance or fervent austerity or spiritual practice, may I become one of the gods!’ This is their wrong view. | T: But if he has such a view as this: ‘By this virtue or observance or asceticism or holy life I shall become a great god or some lesser god,’ that is wrong view in his case.
mn57:3.4 | S: An individual with wrong view is reborn in one of two places, I say: hell or the animal realm. | T: Now there are two destinations for one with wrong view, I say: hell or the animal realm.
mn57:3.5 | S: So if the dog observance succeeds it leads to rebirth in the company of dogs, but if it fails it leads to hell.” | T: So, Puṇṇa, if his dog-duty succeeds, it will lead him to the company of dogs; if it fails, it will lead him to hell.”
mn57:4.1 | S: When he said this, Seniya cried and burst out in tears. | T: When this was said, Seniya the naked dog-duty ascetic cried out and burst into tears.
mn57:4.2 | S: The Buddha said to Puṇṇa, | T: Then the Blessed One told Puṇṇa, son of the Koliyans, the ox-duty ascetic:
mn57:4.3 | S: “This is what I didn’t get through to you when I said: | T: “Puṇṇa, I could not persuade you when I said:
mn57:4.4 | S: ‘Enough, Puṇṇa, let it be. Don’t ask me that.’” | T: ‘Enough, Puṇṇa, let that be. Do not ask me that.’”
mn57:4.5 | S: Seniya said, “Sir, I’m not crying because of what the Buddha said. | T: Then Seniya the naked dog-duty ascetic said: “Venerable sir, I am not crying because the Blessed One has said this about me,
mn57:4.6 | S: But, sir, for a long time I have undertaken this observance to behave like a dog. | T: but because I have long taken up and practised this dog-duty.
mn57:4.7 | S: Sir, this Puṇṇa is a cow votary. | T: Venerable sir, this Puṇṇa, son of the Koliyans, is an ox-duty ascetic.
mn57:4.8 | S: For a long time he has undertaken that observance to behave like a cow. | T: He has long taken up and practised that ox-duty.
mn57:4.9 | S: Where will he be reborn in his next life?” | T: What will be his destination? What will be his future course?”
mn57:4.10 | S: “Enough, Seniya, let it be. Don’t ask me that.” | T: “Enough, Seniya, let that be. Do not ask me that.”
mn57:4.11 | S: For a second time … | T: A second time…
mn57:4.12 | S: and a third time Seniya said to the Buddha, | T: And a third time Seniya the naked dog-duty ascetic asked the Blessed One:
mn57:4.13 | S: “Sir, this Puṇṇa is a cow votary. | T: “Venerable sir, this Puṇṇa, son of the Koliyans, is an ox-duty ascetic.
mn57:4.14 | S: For a long time he has undertaken that observance to behave like a cow. | T: He has long taken up and practised that ox-duty.
mn57:4.15 | S: Where will he be reborn in his next life?” | T: What will be his destination? What will be his future course?”
mn57:4.16 | S: “Clearly, Seniya, I’m not getting through to you when I say: | T: “Well, Seniya, since I certainly cannot persuade you when I say:
mn57:4.17 | S: ‘Enough, Seniya, let it be. Don’t ask me that.’ | T: ‘Enough, Seniya, let that be. Do not ask me that,’
mn57:4.18 | S: Nevertheless, I will answer you. | T: I shall therefore answer you.
mn57:5.1 | S: Take someone who develops the cow observance fully and uninterruptedly. They develop a cow’s ethics, a cow’s mentality, and a cow’s behavior fully and uninterruptedly. | T: “Here, Seniya, someone develops the ox-duty fully and uninterruptedly; he develops the ox-habit fully and uninterruptedly; he develops the ox-mind fully and uninterruptedly; he develops ox-behaviour fully and uninterruptedly.
mn57:5.2 | S: When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in the company of cows. | T: Having done so, on the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in the company of oxen.
mn57:5.3 | S: But if they have such a view: ‘By this precept or observance or fervent austerity or spiritual practice, may I become one of the gods!’ This is their wrong view. | T: But if he has such a view as this: ‘By this virtue or observance or asceticism or holy life I shall become a great god or some lesser god,’ that is wrong view in his case.
mn57:5.4 | S: An individual with wrong view is reborn in one of two places, I say: hell or the animal realm. | T: Now there are two destinations for one with wrong view, I say: hell or the animal realm.
mn57:5.5 | S: So if the cow observance succeeds it leads to rebirth in the company of cows, but if it fails it leads to hell.” | T: So, Seniya, if his ox-duty succeeds, it will lead him to the company of oxen; if it fails, it will lead him to hell.”
mn57:6.1 | S: When he said this, Puṇṇa cried and burst out in tears. | T: When this was said, Puṇṇa, son of the Koliyans, the ox-duty ascetic cried out and burst into tears.
mn57:6.2 | S: The Buddha said to Seniya, | T: Then the Blessed One told Seniya the naked dog-duty ascetic:
mn57:6.3 | S: “This is what I didn’t get through to you when I said: | T: “Seniya, I could not persuade you when I said:
mn57:6.4 | S: ‘Enough, Seniya, let it be. Don’t ask me that.’” | T: ‘Enough, Seniya, let that be. Do not ask me that.’”
mn57:6.5 | S: Puṇṇa said, “Sir, I’m not crying because of what the Buddha said. | T: Then Puṇṇa the ox-duty ascetic said: “Venerable sir, I am not crying because the Blessed One has said this about me,
mn57:6.6 | S: But, sir, for a long time I have undertaken this observance to behave like a cow. | T: but because I have long taken up and practised this ox-duty.
mn57:6.7 | S: I am quite confident that the Buddha | T: Venerable sir, I have confidence in the Blessed One thus:
mn57:6.8 | S: is capable of teaching me so that I can give up this cow observance, and the naked ascetic Seniya can give up that dog observance.” | T: ‘The Blessed One is capable of teaching me the Dhamma in such a way that I can abandon this ox-duty and that this Seniya the naked dog-duty ascetic can abandon that dog-duty.’”
mn57:6.9 | S: “Well then, Puṇṇa, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.” | T: “Then, Puṇṇa, listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”—
mn57:6.10 | S: “Yes, sir,” he replied. | T: “Yes, venerable sir,” he replied.
mn57:6.11 | S: The Buddha said this: | T: The Blessed One said this:
mn57:7.1 | S: “Puṇṇa, I declare these four kinds of deeds, having realized them with my own insight. | T: “Puṇṇa, there are four kinds of action proclaimed by me after realising them for myself with direct knowledge.
mn57:7.2 | S: What four? | T: What are the four?
mn57:7.3 | S: There are dark deeds with dark results; | T: There is dark action with dark result;
mn57:7.4 | S: bright deeds with bright results; | T: there is bright action with bright result;
mn57:7.5 | S: dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results; and | T: there is dark-and-bright action with dark-and-bright result;
mn57:7.6 | S: neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright results, which lead to the ending of deeds. | T: and there is action that is neither dark nor bright with neither-dark-nor-bright result, action that leads to the destruction of action.
mn57:8.1 | S: And what are dark deeds with dark results? | T: “And what, Puṇṇa, is dark action with dark result?
mn57:8.2 | S: It’s when someone makes hurtful choices by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: Here someone generates an afflictive bodily formation, an afflictive verbal formation, an afflictive mental formation.
mn57:8.3 | S: Having made these choices, they’re reborn in a hurtful world, | T: Having generated an afflictive bodily formation, an afflictive verbal formation, an afflictive mental formation, he reappears in an afflictive world.
mn57:8.4 | S: where hurtful contacts strike them. | T: When he has reappeared in an afflictive world, afflictive contacts touch him.
mn57:8.5 | S: Touched by hurtful contacts, they experience hurtful feelings that are absolutely painful—like the beings in hell. | T: Being touched by afflictive contacts, he feels afflictive feelings, exclusively painful, as in the case of the beings in hell.
mn57:8.6 | S: This is how a being is born from a being. | T: Thus a being’s reappearance is due to a being:
mn57:8.7 | S: For your deeds determine your rebirth, | T: one reappears through the actions one has performed.
mn57:8.8 | S: and when you’re reborn contacts strike you. | T: When one has reappeared, contacts touch one.
mn57:8.9 | S: This is why I say that sentient beings are heirs to their deeds. | T: Thus I say beings are the heirs of their actions.
mn57:8.10 | S: These are called dark deeds with dark results. | T: This is called dark action with dark result.
mn57:9.1 | S: And what are bright deeds with bright results? | T: “And what, Puṇṇa, is bright action with bright result?
mn57:9.2 | S: It’s when someone makes pleasing choices by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: Here someone generates an unafflictive bodily formation, an unafflictive verbal formation, an unafflictive mental formation.
mn57:9.3 | S: Having made these choices, they are reborn in a pleasing world, | T: Having generated an unafflictive bodily formation, an unafflictive verbal formation, an unafflictive mental formation, he reappears in an unafflictive world.
mn57:9.4 | S: where pleasing contacts strike them. | T: When he has reappeared in an unafflictive world, unafflictive contacts touch him.
mn57:9.5 | S: Touched by pleasing contacts, they experience pleasing feelings of absolute happiness—like the gods of universal beauty. | T: Being touched by unafflictive contacts, he feels unafflictive feelings, exclusively pleasant, as in the case of the gods of Refulgent Glory.
mn57:9.6 | S: This is how a being is born from a being. | T: Thus a being’s reappearance is due to a being;
mn57:9.7 | S: For your deeds determine your rebirth, | T: one reappears through the actions one has performed.
mn57:9.8 | S: and when you’re reborn contacts strike you. | T: When one has reappeared, contacts touch one.
mn57:9.9 | S: This is why I say that sentient beings are heirs to their deeds. | T: Thus I say beings are the heirs of their actions.
mn57:9.10 | S: These are called bright deeds with bright results. | T: This is called bright action with bright result.
mn57:10.1 | S: And what are dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results? | T: “And what, Puṇṇa, is dark-and-bright action with dark-and-bright result?
mn57:10.2 | S: It’s when someone makes both hurtful and pleasing choices by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: Here someone generates a bodily formation that is both afflictive and unafflictive, a verbal formation that is both afflictive and unafflictive, a mental formation that is both afflictive and unafflictive.
mn57:10.3 | S: Having made these choices, they are reborn in a world that is both hurtful and pleasing, | T: Having generated a bodily formation, a verbal formation, a mental formation that is both afflictive and unafflictive, he reappears in a world that is both afflictive and unafflictive.
mn57:10.4 | S: where hurtful and pleasing contacts strike them. | T: When he has reappeared in a world that is both afflictive and unafflictive, both afflictive and unafflictive contacts touch him.
mn57:10.5 | S: Touched by both hurtful and pleasing contacts, they experience both hurtful and pleasing feelings that are a mixture of pleasure and pain—like humans, some gods, and some beings in the underworld. | T: Being touched by both afflictive and unafflictive contacts, he feels both afflictive and unafflictive feelings, mingled pleasure and pain, as in the case of human beings and some gods and some beings in the lower worlds.
mn57:10.6 | S: This is how a being is born from a being. | T: Thus a being’s reappearance is due to a being:
mn57:10.7 | S: For what you do brings about your rebirth, | T: one reappears through the actions one has performed.
mn57:10.8 | S: and when you’re reborn contacts strike you. | T: When one has reappeared, contacts touch one.
mn57:10.9 | S: This is why I say that sentient beings are heirs to their deeds. | T: Thus I say beings are the heirs to their actions.
mn57:10.10 | S: These are called dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results. | T: This is called dark-and-bright action with dark-and-bright result.
mn57:11.1 | S: And what are neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright results, which lead to the ending of deeds? | T: “And what, Puṇṇa, is action that is neither dark nor bright with neither-dark-nor-bright result, action that leads to the destruction of action?
mn57:11.2 | S: It’s the intention to give up dark deeds with dark results, bright deeds with bright results, and both dark and bright deeds with both dark and bright results. | T: Therein, the volition for abandoning the kind of action that is dark with dark result, and the volition for abandoning the kind of action that is bright with bright result, and the volition for abandoning the kind of action that is dark and bright with dark-and-bright result:
mn57:11.3 | S: These are called neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright results, which lead to the ending of deeds. | T: this is called action that is neither dark nor bright with neither-dark-nor-bright result, action that leads to the destruction of action.
mn57:11.4 | S: These are the four kinds of deeds that I declare, having realized them with my own insight.” | T: These are the four kinds of action proclaimed by me after realising them for myself with direct knowledge.”
mn57:12.1 | S: When he had spoken, Puṇṇa the Koliyan said to the Buddha, | T: When this was said, Puṇṇa, son of the Koliyans, the ox-duty ascetic said to the Blessed One:
mn57:12.2 | S: “Excellent, sir! Excellent! … | T: “Magnificent, venerable sir! Magnificent, venerable sir!
mn57:12.3 | P: Seyyathāpi, bhante …pe… | T: The Blessed One has made the Dhamma clear in many ways…
mn57:12.4 | S: From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” | T: From today let the Blessed One remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge for life.”
mn57:13.1 | S: And Seniya the naked ascetic said to the Buddha, | T: But Seniya the naked dog-duty ascetic said to the Blessed One:
mn57:13.2 | S: “Excellent, sir! Excellent! … | T: “Magnificent, venerable sir! Magnificent, venerable sir!
mn57:13.3 | P: Seyyathāpi, bhante …pe… pakāsito. | T: The Blessed One has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with eyesight to see forms.
mn57:13.4 | S: I go for refuge to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. | T: I go to the Blessed One for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
mn57:13.5 | S: Sir, may I receive the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha’s presence?” | T: I would receive the going forth under the Blessed One, I would receive the full admission.”
mn57:14.1 | S: “Seniya, if someone formerly ordained in another sect wishes to take the going forth, the ordination in this teaching and training, they must spend four months on probation. When four months have passed, if the mendicants are satisfied, they’ll give the going forth, the ordination into monkhood. | T: “Seniya, one who formerly belonged to another sect and desires the going forth and the full admission in this Dhamma and Discipline lives on probation for four months. At the end of four months, if the bhikkhus are satisfied with him, they give him the going forth and the full admission to the bhikkhus’ state.
mn57:14.2 | S: However, I recognize individual differences in this matter.” | T: But I recognise individual differences in this matter.”
mn57:14.3 | S: “Sir, if four months probation are required in such a case, I’ll spend four years on probation. When four years have passed, if the mendicants are satisfied, let them give me the going forth, the ordination into monkhood.” | T: “Venerable sir, if those who formerly belonged to another sect and desire the going forth and the full admission in this Dhamma and Discipline live on probation for four months, and if at the end of the four months the bhikkhus being satisfied with them give them the going forth and the full admission to the bhikkhus’ state, then I will live on probation for four years. At the end of the four years if the bhikkhus are satisfied with me, let them give me the going forth and the full admission to the bhikkhus’ state.”
mn57:15.1 | S: And the naked ascetic Seniya received the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha’s presence. | T: Then Seniya the naked dog-duty ascetic received the going forth under the Blessed One, and he received the full admission.
mn57:15.2 | S: Not long after his ordination, Venerable Seniya, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness. | T: And soon, not long after his full admission, dwelling alone, withdrawn, diligent, ardent, and resolute, the venerable Seniya, by realising for himself with direct knowledge, here and now entered upon and abided in that supreme goal of the holy life for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from the home life into homelessness.
mn57:15.3 | S: He understood: “Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further for this place.” | T: He directly knew: “Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.”
mn57:15.4 | S: And Venerable Seniya became one of the perfected. | T: And the venerable Seniya became one of the arahants.
mn57:15.5 | P: Kukkuravatikasuttaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ sattamaṁ. | T: (none)

