## mn75, continued
mn75:26.1 | S: When he said this, Māgaṇḍiya said to him, | T: When this was said, the wanderer Māgandiya said:
mn75:26.2 | S: “Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! | T: “Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent, Master Gotama!
mn75:26.3 | S: As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, worthy Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. | T: Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with eyesight to see forms.
mn75:26.4 | S: I go for refuge to the worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. | T: I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
mn75:26.5 | S: May I receive the going forth, the ordination in the worthy Gotama’s presence?” | T: I would receive the going forth under Master Gotama. I would receive the full admission.”
mn75:27.1 | S: “Māgaṇḍiya, if someone formerly ordained in another sect wishes to take the going forth, the ordination in this teaching and training, they must spend four months on probation. When four months have passed, if the mendicants are satisfied, they’ll give the going forth, the ordination into monkhood. | T: “Māgandiya, one who formerly belonged to another sect and desires the going forth and the full admission in this Dhamma and Discipline lives on probation for four months. At the end of four months, if the bhikkhus are satisfied with him, they give him the going forth and the full admission to the bhikkhus’ state.
mn75:27.2 | S: However, I recognize individual differences in this matter.” | T: But I recognise individual differences in this matter.”
mn75:27.3 | S: “Sir, if four months probation are required in such a case, I’ll spend four years on probation. When four years have passed, if the mendicants are satisfied, let them give me the going forth, the ordination into monkhood.” | T: “Venerable sir, if those who formerly belonged to another sect and desire the going forth and the full admission in this Dhamma and Discipline live on probation for four months, and if at the end of the four months the bhikkhus being satisfied with them give them the going forth and the full admission to the bhikkhus’ state, then I will live on probation for four years. At the end of the four years if the bhikkhus are satisfied with me, let them give me the going forth and the full admission to the bhikkhus’ state.”
mn75:28.1 | S: And the wanderer Māgaṇḍiya received the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha’s presence. | T: Then the wanderer Māgandiya received the going forth under the Blessed One, and he received the full admission.
mn75:28.2 | S: Not long after his ordination, Venerable Māgaṇḍiya, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness. | T: And soon, not long after his full admission, dwelling alone, withdrawn, diligent, ardent, and resolute, the venerable Māgandiya, by realising for himself with direct knowledge, here and now entered upon and abided in that supreme goal of the holy life for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from the home life into homelessness.
mn75:28.3 | S: He understood: “Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further for this place.” | T: He directly knew: “Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.”
mn75:28.4 | S: And Venerable Māgaṇḍiya became one of the perfected. | T: And the venerable Māgandiya became one of the arahants.
mn75:28.5 | P: Māgaṇḍiyasuttaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ pañcamaṁ. | T: (none)

## dn2
dn2:1.0 | S: 1. A Discussion With the King’s Ministers | T: Statements of the Ministers
dn2:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
dn2:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha in the Mango Grove of Jīvaka Komārabhacca, together with a large Saṅgha of 1,250 mendicants. | T: On one occasion the Exalted One was dwelling at Rājagaha, in Jīvaka Komārabhacca’s Mango Grove, together with a large company of twelve hundred and fifty bhikkhus.
dn2:1.3 | S: Now, at that time it was the sabbath—the Komudī full moon on the fifteenth day of the fourth month—and King Ajātasattu of Magadha, son of the princess of Videha, was sitting upstairs in the royal longhouse surrounded by his ministers. | T: At the time, on the fifteenth-day Uposatha, the full-moon night of Komudī in the fourth month, King Ajātasattu of Magadha, the son of Queen Videhā, was sitting on the upper terrace of his palace surrounded by his ministers.
dn2:1.4 | S: Then Ajātasattu of Magadha, son of the princess of Videha, expressed this heartfelt sentiment, | T: There the king uttered the following joyful exclamation:
dn2:1.5 | S: “Oh, sirs, this moonlit night is so very delightful, so beautiful, so glorious, so lovely, so striking. | T: “How delightful, friends, is this moonlit night! How beautiful is this moonlit night! How lovely is this moonlit night! How tranquil is this moonlit night! How auspicious is this moonlit night!
dn2:1.6 | S: Now, what ascetic or brahmin might I pay homage to today, paying homage to whom my mind might find peace?” | T: Is there any recluse or brahmin that we could visit tonight who might be able to bring peace to my mind?”
dn2:2.1 | S: When he had spoken, one of the king’s ministers said to him, | T: Thereupon one of his ministers said:
dn2:2.2 | S: “Your Majesty, this Pūraṇa Kassapa leads an order and a community, and tutors a community. He’s a well-known and famous religious founder, deemed holy by many people. He is of long standing, long gone forth; he is advanced in years and has reached the final stage of life. | T: “Your majesty, there is Pūraṇa Kassapa, the leader of an order, the leader of a group, the teacher of a group, well-known and famous, a spiritual leader whom many people esteem as holy. He is aged, long gone forth, advanced in years, in the last phase of life.
dn2:2.3 | S: Let Your Majesty pay homage to him. | T: Your majesty should visit him.
dn2:2.4 | S: Hopefully in so doing your mind will find peace.” | T: Perhaps he might bring peace to your mind.”
dn2:2.5 | S: But when he had spoken, the king kept silent. | T: But when this was said, King Ajātasattu remained silent.
dn2:3.1 | S: Another of the king’s ministers said to him, | T: Other ministers said:
dn2:3.2 | S: “Your Majesty, this bamboo-staffed ascetic Gosāla leads an order and a community, and tutors a community. He’s a well-known and famous religious founder, deemed holy by many people. He is of long standing, long gone forth; he is advanced in years and has reached the final stage of life. | T: “Your majesty, there is Makkhali Gosāla …
dn2:3.3 | S: Let Your Majesty pay homage to him. | T: (none)
dn2:3.4 | S: Hopefully in so doing your mind will find peace.” | T: (none)
dn2:3.5 | S: But when he had spoken, the king kept silent. | T: (none)
dn2:4.1 | S: Another of the king’s ministers said to him, | T: (none)
dn2:4.2 | S: “Your Majesty, this Ajita of the hair blanket leads an order and a community, and tutors a community. He’s a well-known and famous religious founder, deemed holy by many people. He is of long standing, long gone forth; he is advanced in years and has reached the final stage of life. | T: Ajita Kesakambala …
dn2:4.3 | S: Let Your Majesty pay homage to him. | T: (none)
dn2:4.4 | S: Hopefully in so doing your mind will find peace.” | T: (none)
dn2:4.5 | S: But when he had spoken, the king kept silent. | T: (none)
dn2:5.1 | S: Another of the king’s ministers said to him, | T: (none)
dn2:5.2 | S: “Your Majesty, this Pakudha Kaccāyana leads an order and a community, and tutors a community. He’s a well-known and famous religious founder, deemed holy by many people. He is of long standing, long gone forth; he is advanced in years and has reached the final stage of life. | T: Pakudha Kaccāyana …
dn2:5.3 | S: Let Your Majesty pay homage to him. | T: (none)
dn2:5.4 | S: Hopefully in so doing your mind will find peace.” | T: (none)
dn2:5.5 | S: But when he had spoken, the king kept silent. | T: (none)
dn2:6.1 | S: Another of the king’s ministers said to him, | T: (none)
dn2:6.2 | S: “Your Majesty, this Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta leads an order and a community, and tutors a community. He’s a well-known and famous religious founder, deemed holy by many people. He is of long standing, long gone forth; he is advanced in years and has reached the final stage of life. | T: Sañjaya Belaṭṭhaputta …
dn2:6.3 | S: Let Your Majesty pay homage to him. | T: (none)
dn2:6.4 | S: Hopefully in so doing your mind will find peace.” | T: (none)
dn2:6.5 | S: But when he had spoken, the king kept silent. | T: (none)
dn2:7.1 | S: Another of the king’s ministers said to him, | T: (none)
dn2:7.2 | S: “Your Majesty, this Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan leads an order and a community, and tutors a community. He’s a well-known and famous religious founder, deemed holy by many people. He is of long standing, long gone forth; he is advanced in years and has reached the final stage of life. | T: Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, the leader of an order, the leader of a group, the teacher of a group, well-known and famous, a spiritual leader whom many people esteem as holy. He is aged, long gone forth, advanced in years, in the last phase of life.
dn2:7.3 | S: Let Your Majesty pay homage to him. | T: Your majesty should visit him.
dn2:7.4 | S: Hopefully in so doing your mind will find peace.” | T: Perhaps he might bring peace to your mind.”
dn2:7.5 | S: But when he had spoken, the king kept silent. | T: But when this was said, King Ajātasattu remained silent.
dn2:8.0 | S: 2. A Discussion With Jīvaka Komārabhacca | T: The Statement of Jīvaka Komārabhacca
dn2:8.1 | S: Now at that time Jīvaka Komārabhacca was sitting silently not far from the king. | T: All this time Jīvaka Komārabhacca sat silently not far from King Ajātasattu.
dn2:8.2 | S: Then the king said to him, | T: The king then said to him:
dn2:8.3 | S: “But my dear Jīvaka, why are you silent?” | T: “Friend Jīvaka, why do you keep silent?”
dn2:8.4 | S: “Your Majesty, this Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha is staying in my mango grove together with a large Saṅgha of 1,250 mendicants. | T: Jīvaka said: “Your majesty, the Exalted One, the Worthy One, the perfectly enlightened Buddha, together with a large company of twelve hundred and fifty bhikkhus, is now dwelling in our Mango Grove.
dn2:8.5 | S: He has this good reputation: | T: A favourable report concerning him is circulating thus:
dn2:8.6 | S: ‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ | T: ‘This Exalted One is a worthy one, perfectly enlightened, endowed with clear knowledge and conduct, accomplished, a knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of men to be tamed, teacher of gods and men, enlightened and exalted.’
dn2:8.7 | S: Let Your Majesty pay homage to him. | T: Your majesty should visit the Exalted One.
dn2:8.8 | S: Hopefully in so doing your mind will find peace.” | T: Perhaps if you visit him he might bring peace to your mind.”
dn2:8.9 | S: “Well then, my dear Jīvaka, have the elephants readied.” | T: “Then get the elephant vehicles prepared, friend Jīvaka.”
dn2:9.1 | S: “Yes, Your Majesty,” replied Jīvaka. He had around five hundred female elephants readied, in addition to the king’s bull elephant for riding. Then he informed the king, | T: “Yes, your majesty!” Jīvaka replied. He then had five hundred female elephants prepared, as well as the king’s personal bull-elephant, and announced to the king:
dn2:9.2 | S: “The elephants are ready, Your Majesty. | T: “Your majesty, your elephant vehicles are ready.
dn2:9.3 | S: Please go at your convenience.” | T: Do as you think fit.”
dn2:10.1 | S: Then King Ajātasattu had women mounted on each of the five hundred female elephants, while he mounted his bull elephant. With attendants carrying torches, he set out in full royal pomp from Rājagaha to Jīvaka’s Mango Grove. | T: King Ajātasattu then had five hundred of his women mounted on the female elephants, one on each, while he himself mounted his personal bull-elephant. With his attendants carrying torches, he went forth from Rājagaha in full royal splendour, setting out in the direction of Jīvaka’s Mango Grove.
dn2:10.2 | S: But as he drew near the mango grove, the king became frightened, scared, his hair standing on end. | T: When King Ajātasattu was not far from the Mango Grove, he was suddenly gripped by fear, trepidation, and terror. Frightened, agitated, and terror-stricken,
dn2:10.3 | S: He said to Jīvaka, | T: he said to Jīvaka:
dn2:10.4 | S: “My dear Jīvaka, I hope you’re not deceiving me! | T: “You aren’t deceiving me, are you, friend Jīvaka?
dn2:10.5 | S: I hope you’re not betraying me! | T: You aren’t betraying me?
dn2:10.6 | S: I hope you’re not turning me over to my enemies! | T: You aren’t about to turn me over to my enemies?
dn2:10.7 | S: For how on earth can there be no sound of coughing or clearing throats or any noise in such a large Saṅgha of 1,250 mendicants?” | T: How could there be such a large company of bhikkhus, twelve hundred and fifty bhikkhus, without any sound of sneezing or coughing, or any noise at all?”
dn2:10.8 | S: “Do not fear, Great King, do not fear! | T: “Do not be afraid, great king. Do not be afraid.
dn2:10.9 | S: I am not deceiving you, | T: I am not deceiving you, your majesty,
dn2:10.10 | S: or betraying you, | T: or betraying you,
dn2:10.11 | S: or turning you over to your enemies. | T: or turning you over to your enemies.
dn2:10.12 | S: Go forward, Great King, go forward! Those are lamps shining in the pavilion.” | T: Go forward, great king! Go straight forward! Those are lamps burning in the pavilion hall.”
dn2:11.0 | S: 3. The Question About the Fruits of the Ascetic Life | T: The Question on the Fruits of Recluseship
dn2:11.1 | S: Then King Ajātasattu rode on the elephant as far as the terrain allowed, then descended and approached the pavilion door on foot, where he asked Jīvaka, | T: Then King Ajātasattu, having gone by elephant as far as he could, dismounted and approached the door of the pavilion hall on foot. Having approached, he asked Jīvaka:
dn2:11.2 | S: “But my dear Jīvaka, where is the Buddha?” | T: “But where, Jīvaka, is the Exalted One?”
dn2:11.3 | S: “That is the Buddha, Great King, that is the Buddha! | T: “That is the Exalted One, great king.
dn2:11.4 | S: He’s sitting against the central column facing east, in front of the Saṅgha of mendicants.” | T: He is the one sitting against the middle pillar, facing east, in front of the company of bhikkhus.”
dn2:12.1 | S: Then the king went up to the Buddha and stood to one side. | T: King Ajātasattu then approached the Exalted One and stood to one side.
dn2:12.2 | S: He looked around the Saṅgha of mendicants, who were so very silent, like a still, clear lake, and expressed this heartfelt sentiment, | T: As he stood there surveying the company of bhikkhus, which sat in complete silence as serene as a calm lake, he uttered the following joyful exclamation:
dn2:12.3 | S: “May my son, Prince Udāyibhadda, be blessed with such peace as the Saṅgha of mendicants now enjoys!” | T: “May my son, the Prince Udāyibhadda, enjoy such peace as the company of bhikkhus now enjoys!”
dn2:12.4 | S: “Has your mind gone to one you love, Great King?” | T: (The Exalted One said:) “Do your thoughts, great king, follow the call of your affection?”
dn2:12.5 | S: “I love my son, sir, Prince Udāyibhadda. | T: “Venerable sir, I love my son, the Prince Udāyibhadda.
dn2:12.6 | S: May he be blessed with such peace as the Saṅgha of mendicants now enjoys!” | T: May he enjoy such peace as the company of bhikkhus now enjoys.”
dn2:13.1 | S: Then the king bowed to the Buddha, raised his cupped palms toward the Saṅgha, and sat down to one side. | T: King Ajātasattu then paid homage to the Exalted One, reverently saluted the company of bhikkhus, sat down to one side,
dn2:13.2 | S: He said to the Buddha, | T: and said to the Exalted One:
dn2:13.3 | S: “Sir, I’d like to ask you about a certain point, if you’d take the time to answer.” | T: “Venerable sir, I would like to ask the Exalted One about a certain point, if he would take the time to answer my question.”
dn2:13.4 | P: sace me bhagavā okāsaṁ karoti pañhassa veyyākaraṇāyā”ti. | T: (none)
dn2:13.5 | S: “Ask what you wish, Great King.” | T: “Ask whatever you wish to, great king.”
dn2:14.1 | S: “Sir, there are many different professional fields. | T: “There are, venerable sir, various crafts,
dn2:14.2 | S: These include elephant marshals, cavalry, charioteers, archers, bannermen, adjutants, food servers, warrior-chiefs, princes, chargers, great warriors, heroes, leather-clad soldiers, and sons of bondservants. | T: such as elephant trainers, horse trainers, charioteers, archers, standard bearers, camp marshals, commandos, high royal officers, front-line soldiers, bull-warriors, military heroes, mail-clad warriors, domestic slaves,
dn2:14.3 | S: They also include bakers, barbers, bathroom attendants, cooks, garland-makers, dyers, embroiderers, basket-makers, potters, accountants, finger-talliers, or those following any similar professions. All these live off the fruits of their profession which are apparent in this very life. | T: confectioners, barbers, bath attendants, cooks, garland-makers, laundrymen, weavers, basket-makers, potters, statisticians, accountants, and various other crafts of a similar nature. All those (who practise these crafts) enjoy here and now the visible fruits of their crafts.
dn2:14.4 | S: With that they make themselves happy and pleased. They make their parents, their children and partners, and their friends and colleagues happy and pleased. And they establish an uplifting religious donation for ascetics and brahmins that’s conducive to heaven, ripens in happiness, and leads to heaven. | T: They obtain happiness and joy themselves, and they give happiness and joy to their parents, wives and children, and their friends and colleagues. They establish an excellent presentation of gifts to recluses and brahmins—leading to heaven, ripening in happiness, conducing to a heavenly rebirth.
dn2:14.5 | S: Sir, can you point out a fruit of the ascetic life that’s likewise apparent in this very life?” | T: Is it possible, venerable sir, to point out any fruit of recluseship that is similarly visible here and now?”
dn2:15.1 | S: “Great king, do you recall having asked this question of other ascetics and brahmins?” | T: “Do you remember, great king, ever asking other recluses and brahmins this question?”
dn2:15.2 | S: “I do, sir.” | T: “I do remember asking them, venerable sir.”
dn2:15.3 | S: “If you wouldn’t mind, Great King, tell me how they answered.” | T: “If it isn’t troublesome for you, please tell us how they answered.”
dn2:15.4 | S: “It’s no trouble when someone such as the Blessed One is sitting here.” | T: “It is not troublesome for me, venerable sir, when the Exalted One or anyone like him is present.”
dn2:15.5 | S: “Well, speak then, Great King.” | T: “Then speak, great king.”
dn2:16.0 | S: 3.1. The Doctrine of Pūraṇa Kassapa | T: The Doctrine of Pūraṇa Kassapa
dn2:16.1 | S: “This one time, sir, I approached Pūraṇa Kassapa and exchanged greetings with him. | T: “One time, I approached Pūraṇa Kassapa, exchanged greetings and courtesies with him,
dn2:16.2 | S: When the greetings and polite conversation were over, I sat down to one side, and asked him the same question. | T: and sat down to one side. I then asked him (as in §14) if he could point out any fruit of recluseship visible here and now.
dn2:16.3 | P: ‘yathā nu kho imāni, bho kassapa, puthusippāyatanāni, | T: (none)
dn2:16.4 | P: seyyathidaṁ—hatthārohā assārohā rathikā dhanuggahā celakā calakā piṇḍadāyakā uggā rājaputtā pakkhandino mahānāgā sūrā cammayodhino dāsikaputtā āḷārikā kappakā nhāpakā sūdā mālakārā rajakā pesakārā naḷakārā kumbhakārā gaṇakā muddikā, yāni vā panaññānipi evaṅgatāni puthusippāyatanāni, te diṭṭheva dhamme sandiṭṭhikaṁ sippaphalaṁ upajīvanti; | T: (none)
dn2:16.5 | P: te tena attānaṁ sukhenti pīṇenti, mātāpitaro sukhenti pīṇenti, puttadāraṁ sukhenti pīṇenti, mittāmacce sukhenti pīṇenti, samaṇabrāhmaṇesu uddhaggikaṁ dakkhiṇaṁ patiṭṭhapenti sovaggikaṁ sukhavipākaṁ saggasaṁvattanikaṁ. | T: (none)
dn2:16.6 | P: Sakkā nu kho, bho kassapa, evameva diṭṭheva dhamme sandiṭṭhikaṁ sāmaññaphalaṁ paññapetun’ti? | T: (none)
dn2:17.1 | S: He said to me: | T: “When I had finished speaking, Pūraṇa Kassapa said to me:
dn2:17.2 | S: ‘Great king, the one who acts does nothing wrong when they punish, mutilate, torture, aggrieve, oppress, intimidate, or when they encourage others to do the same. They do nothing wrong when they kill, steal, break into houses, plunder wealth, steal from isolated buildings, commit highway robbery, commit adultery, and lie. If you were to reduce all the living creatures of this earth to one heap and mass of flesh with a razor-edged chakram, no evil comes of that, and no outcome of evil. | T: ‘Great king, if one acts or induces others to act, mutilates or induces others to mutilate, tortures or induces others to torture, inflicts sorrow or induces others to inflict sorrow, oppresses or induces others to oppress, intimidates or induces others to intimidate; if one destroys life, takes what is not given, breaks into houses, plunders wealth, commits burglary, ambushes highways, commits adultery, speaks falsehood—one does no evil. If with a razor-edged disk one were to reduce all the living beings on this earth to a single heap and pile of flesh, by doing so there would be no evil or outcome of evil.
dn2:17.3 | S: If you were to go along the south bank of the Ganges killing, mutilating, and torturing, and encouraging others to do the same, no evil comes of that, and no outcome of evil. | T: If one were to go along the south bank of the Ganges killing and inducing others to kill, mutilating and inducing others to mutilate, torturing and inducing others to torture, by doing so there would be no evil or outcome of evil.
dn2:17.4 | S: If you were to go along the north bank of the Ganges giving and sacrificing and encouraging others to do the same, no merit comes of that, and no outcome of merit. | T: If one were to go along the north bank of the Ganges giving gifts and inducing others to give gifts, making offerings and inducing others to make offerings, by doing so there would be no merit or outcome of merit.
dn2:17.5 | S: In giving, self-control, restraint, and truthfulness there is no merit or outcome of merit.’ | T: By giving, self-control, restraint, and truthful speech there is no merit or outcome of merit.’
dn2:18.1 | S: And so, when I asked Pūraṇa Kassapa about the fruits of the ascetic life apparent in the present life, he answered with the doctrine of inaction. | T: “Thus, venerable sir, when I asked Pūraṇa Kassapa about a visible fruit of recluseship, he explained to me (his doctrine of) the inefficacy of action.
dn2:18.2 | S: It was like someone who, when asked about a mango, answered with a breadfruit, or when asked about a breadfruit, answered with a mango. | T: Venerable sir, just as if one asked about a mango would speak about a breadfruit, or as if one asked about a breadfruit would speak about a mango,
dn2:18.3 | P: evameva kho me, bhante, pūraṇo kassapo sandiṭṭhikaṁ sāmaññaphalaṁ puṭṭho samāno akiriyaṁ byākāsi. | T: in the same way when I asked Pūraṇa Kassapa about a visible fruit of recluseship he explained to me (his doctrine of) the inefficacy of action.
dn2:18.4 | S: I thought: | T: Then, venerable sir, I thought to myself:
dn2:18.5 | S: ‘How on earth could one such as I presume to rebuke an ascetic or brahmin living in my realm?’ | T: ‘One like myself should not think of troubling a recluse or brahmin living in his realm.’
dn2:18.6 | S: So I neither approved nor rejected that statement of Pūraṇa Kassapa. | T: So I neither rejoiced in the statement of Pūraṇa Kassapa nor did I reject it.
dn2:18.7 | S: I was displeased, but did not express my displeasure. Neither accepting what he said nor contradicting it, I rose from my seat and left. | T: But, though I neither rejoiced in it nor rejected it, I still felt dissatisfied, yet did not utter a word of dissatisfaction. Without accepting his doctrine, without embracing it, I got up from my seat and left.
dn2:19.0 | S: 3.2. The Doctrine of the Bamboo-staffed Ascetic Gosāla | T: The Doctrine of Makkhali Gosāla
dn2:19.1 | S: This one time, sir, I approached the bamboo-staffed ascetic Gosāla and exchanged greetings with him. | T: “Another time, venerable sir, I approached Makkhali Gosāla, exchanged greetings and courtesies with him,
dn2:19.2 | S: When the greetings and polite conversation were over, I sat down to one side, and asked him the same question. | T: and sat down to one side. I then asked him (as in §14) if he could point out a fruit of recluseship visible here and now.
dn2:19.3 | P: ‘yathā nu kho imāni, bho gosāla, puthusippāyatanāni …pe… | T: (none)
dn2:19.4 | P: sakkā nu kho, bho gosāla, evameva diṭṭheva dhamme sandiṭṭhikaṁ sāmaññaphalaṁ paññapetun’ti? | T: (none)
dn2:20.1 | S: He said: | T: “When I had finished speaking, Makkhali Gosāla said to me:
dn2:20.2 | S: ‘Great king, there is no cause or reason for the corruption of sentient beings. Sentient beings are corrupted without cause or reason. | T: ‘Great king, there is no cause or condition for the defilement of beings; beings are defiled without any cause or condition.
dn2:20.3 | S: There’s no cause or reason for the purification of sentient beings. | T: There is no cause or condition for the purification of beings;
dn2:20.4 | S: Sentient beings are purified without cause or reason. | T: beings are purified without cause or condition.
dn2:20.5 | S: One does not act of one’s own volition, one does not act of another’s volition, one does not act from a person’s volition. There is no power, no energy, no human strength or vigor. | T: There is no self-determination, no determination by others, no personal determination. There is no power, no energy, no personal strength, no personal fortitude.
dn2:20.6 | S: All sentient beings, all living creatures, all beings, all souls lack control, power, and energy. Molded by destiny, circumstance, and nature, they experience pleasure and pain in the six classes of rebirth. | T: All sentient beings, all living beings, all creatures, all souls, are helpless, powerless, devoid of energy. Undergoing transformation by destiny, circumstance, and nature, they experience pleasure and pain in the six classes of men.
dn2:20.7 | S: There are 1.4 million main wombs, and 6,000, and 600; 500 deeds, and five, and three; deeds and half-deeds; 62 paths of practice, 62 sub-eons, six classes of rebirth, and eight stages in a person’s life; 4,900 Ājīvaka ascetics, 4,900 wanderers, and 4,900 dragon abodes; 2,000 lordships, 3,000 hells, and 36 realms of dusky sky; seven percipient embryos, seven non-percipient embryos, seven knotless embryos, seven gods, seven mental heavens, seven goblins, seven streams, seven castoff incarnations and 700 castoff incarnations, seven downfalls and 700 downfalls, seven dreams and 700 dreams, and 8.4 million great eons—through all of which the foolish and the astute transmigrate before making an end of suffering. | T: ‘There are fourteen hundred thousand principal modes of origin (for living beings) and six thousand (others) and six hundred (others). There are five hundred kinds of kamma and five kinds of kamma and three kinds of kamma and full kamma and half-kamma. There are sixty-two pathways, sixty-two sub-aeons, six classes of men, eight stages in the life of man, forty-nine hundred modes of livelihood, forty-nine hundred kinds of wanderers, forty-nine hundred abodes of Nāgas, two thousand faculties, three thousand hells, thirty-six realms of dust, seven spheres of percipient beings, seven spheres of non-percipient beings, seven kinds of jointed plants, seven kinds of gods, seven kinds of human beings, seven kinds of demons, seven great lakes, seven major kinds of knots, seven hundred minor kinds of knots, seven major precipices, seven hundred minor precipices, seven major kinds of dreams, seven hundred minor kinds of dreams, eighty-four hundred thousand great aeons. The foolish and the wise, having roamed and wandered through these, will alike make an end to suffering.
dn2:20.8 | S: And here there is no such thing as this: “By this precept or observance or fervent austerity or spiritual practice I shall force unripened deeds to bear their fruit, or eliminate old deeds by experiencing their results little by little,” for that cannot be. | T: ‘Though one might think: “By this moral discipline or observance or austerity or holy life I will ripen unripened kamma and eliminate ripened kamma whenever it comes up”—that cannot be.
dn2:20.9 | S: Pleasure and pain are allotted. Transmigration lasts only for a limited period, so there’s no increase or decrease, no getting better or worse. | T: For pleasure and pain are measured out. Saṁsāra’s limits are fixed, and they can neither be shortened nor extended. There is no advancing forward and no falling back.
dn2:20.10 | S: It’s like how, when you toss a ball of string, it rolls away unraveling. | T: Just as, when a ball of string is thrown, it rolls along unwinding until it comes to its end,
dn2:20.11 | S: In the same way, after transmigrating the foolish and the astute will make an end of suffering.’ | T: in the same way, the foolish and the wise roam and wander (for the fixed length of time), after which they make an end to suffering.’
dn2:21.1 | S: And so, when I asked the bamboo-staffed ascetic Gosāla about the fruits of the ascetic life apparent in the present life, he answered with the doctrine of purification through transmigration. | T: “Thus, venerable sir, when I asked Makkhali Gosāla about a visible fruit of recluseship, he explained to me (his doctrine of) purification through wandering in saṁsāra.
dn2:21.2 | S: It was like someone who, when asked about a mango, answered with a breadfruit, or when asked about a breadfruit, answered with a mango. | T: Venerable sir, just as if one asked about a mango would speak about a breadfruit, or as if one asked about a breadfruit would speak about a mango,
dn2:21.3 | P: evameva kho me, bhante, makkhali gosālo sandiṭṭhikaṁ sāmaññaphalaṁ puṭṭho samāno saṁsārasuddhiṁ byākāsi. | T: in the same way, when I asked Makkhali Gosāla about a visible fruit of recluseship, he explained to me (his doctrine of) purification through wandering in saṁsāra.
dn2:21.4 | S: I thought: | T: Then, venerable sir, I thought to myself:
dn2:21.5 | S: ‘How on earth could one such as I presume to rebuke an ascetic or brahmin living in my realm?’ | T: ‘One like myself should not think of troubling a recluse or brahmin living in his realm.’
dn2:21.6 | S: So I neither approved nor rejected that statement of the bamboo-staffed ascetic Gosāla. | T: So I neither rejoiced in the statement of Makkhali Gosāla nor did I reject it.
dn2:21.7 | S: I was displeased, but did not express my displeasure. Neither accepting what he said nor contradicting it, I rose from my seat and left. | T: But, though I neither rejoiced in it nor rejected it, I still felt dissatisfied, yet did not utter a word of dissatisfaction. Without accepting his doctrine, without embracing it, I got up from my seat and left.
dn2:22.0 | S: 3.3. The Doctrine of Ajita of the Hair Blanket | T: The Doctrine of Ajita Kesakambala
dn2:22.1 | S: This one time, sir, I approached Ajita of the hair blanket and exchanged greetings with him. | T: “Another time, venerable sir, I approached Ajita Kesakambala, exchanged greetings and courtesies with him,
dn2:22.2 | S: When the greetings and polite conversation were over, I sat down to one side, and asked him the same question. | T: and sat down to one side. I then asked him (as in §14) if he could point out a fruit of recluseship visible here and now.
dn2:22.3 | P: ‘yathā nu kho imāni, bho ajita, puthusippāyatanāni …pe… | T: (none)
dn2:22.4 | P: sakkā nu kho, bho ajita, evameva diṭṭheva dhamme sandiṭṭhikaṁ sāmaññaphalaṁ paññapetun’ti? | T: (none)
dn2:23.1 | S: He said: | T: “When I had finished speaking, Ajita Kesakambala said to me:
dn2:23.2 | S: ‘Great king, there is no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There’s no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There’s no afterlife. There’s no such thing as mother and father, or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there’s no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight. | T: ‘Great king, there is no giving, no offering, no liberality. There is no fruit or result of good and bad actions. There is no present world, no world beyond, no mother, no father, no beings who have taken rebirth. In the world there are no recluses and brahmins of right attainment and right practice who explain this world and the world beyond on the basis of their own direct knowledge and realization.
dn2:23.3 | S: This person is made up of the four principal states. When they die, the earth in their body merges and coalesces with the substance of earth. The water in their body merges and coalesces with the substance of water. The fire in their body merges and coalesces with the substance of fire. The air in their body merges and coalesces with the substance of air. The faculties are transferred to space. | T: A person is composed of the four primary elements. When he dies, the earth (in his body) returns to and merges with the (external) body of earth; the water (in his body) returns to and merges with the (external) body of water; the fire (in his body) returns to and merges with the (external) body of fire; the air (in his body) returns to and merges with the (external) body of air. His sense faculties pass over into space.
dn2:23.4 | S: Four men with a bier carry away the corpse. | T: Four men carry the corpse along on a bier.
dn2:23.5 | S: Their footprints show the way to the cremation ground. | T: His eulogies are sounded until they reach the charnel ground.
dn2:23.6 | S: The bones become bleached. Offerings dedicated to the gods end in ashes. | T: His bones turn pigeon-coloured. His meritorious offerings end in ashes.
dn2:23.7 | S: Giving is a doctrine of morons. | T: The practice of giving is a doctrine of fools.
dn2:23.8 | S: When anyone affirms a positive teaching it’s just hollow, false nonsense. | T: Those who declare that there is (an afterlife) speak only false, empty prattle.
dn2:23.9 | S: Both the foolish and the astute are annihilated and destroyed when their body breaks up, and don’t exist after death.’ | T: With the breaking up of the body, the foolish and the wise alike are annihilated and utterly perish. They do not exist after death.’
dn2:24.1 | S: And so, when I asked Ajita of the hair blanket about the fruits of the ascetic life apparent in the present life, he answered with the doctrine of annihilationism. | T: “Thus, venerable sir, when I asked Ajita Kesakambala about a visible fruit of recluseship, he explained to me (his doctrine of) annihilation.
dn2:24.2 | S: It was like someone who, when asked about a mango, answered with a breadfruit, or when asked about a breadfruit, answered with a mango. | T: Venerable sir, just as if one asked about a mango would speak about a breadfruit, or as if one asked about a breadfruit would speak about a mango,
dn2:24.3 | P: evameva kho me, bhante, ajito kesakambalo sandiṭṭhikaṁ sāmaññaphalaṁ puṭṭho samāno ucchedaṁ byākāsi. | T: in the same way, when I asked Ajita Kesakambala about a visible fruit of recluseship, he explained to me (his doctrine of) annihilation.
dn2:24.4 | S: I thought: | T: Then, venerable sir, I thought to myself:
dn2:24.5 | S: ‘How on earth could one such as I presume to rebuke an ascetic or brahmin living in my realm?’ | T: ‘One like myself should not think of troubling a recluse or brahmin living in his realm.’
dn2:24.6 | S: So I neither approved nor rejected that statement of Ajita of the hair blanket. | T: So I neither rejoiced in the statement of Ajita Kesakambala nor did I reject it.
dn2:24.7 | S: I was displeased, but did not express my displeasure. Neither accepting what he said nor contradicting it, I rose from my seat and left. | T: But though I neither rejoiced in it nor rejected it, I still felt dissatisfied, yet did not utter a word of dissatisfaction. Without accepting his doctrine, without embracing it, I got up from my seat and left.
dn2:25.0 | S: 3.4. The Doctrine of Pakudha Kaccāyana | T: The Doctrine of Pakudha Kaccāyana
dn2:25.1 | S: This one time, sir, I approached Pakudha Kaccāyana and exchanged greetings with him. | T: “Another time, venerable sir, I approached Pakudha Kaccāyana, exchanged greetings and courtesies with him,
dn2:25.2 | S: When the greetings and polite conversation were over, I sat down to one side, and asked him the same question. | T: and sat down to one side. I then asked him (as in §14) if he could point out a fruit of recluseship visible here and now.
dn2:25.3 | P: ‘yathā nu kho imāni, bho kaccāyana, puthusippāyatanāni …pe… | T: (none)
dn2:25.4 | P: sakkā nu kho, bho kaccāyana, evameva diṭṭheva dhamme sandiṭṭhikaṁ sāmaññaphalaṁ paññapetun’ti? | T: (none)
dn2:26.1 | S: He said: | T: “When I had finished speaking, Pakudha Kaccāyana said to me:
dn2:26.2 | S: ‘Great king, these seven substances are not made, not derived, not created, without a creator, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. | T: ‘Great king, there are seven bodies that are unmade, unfashioned, uncreated, without a creator, barren, stable as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar.
dn2:26.3 | S: They don’t move or deteriorate or obstruct each other. They’re unable to cause pleasure, pain, or both pleasure and pain to each other. | T: They do not alter, do not change, do not obstruct one another; they are incapable of causing one another either pleasure or pain, or both pleasure and pain.
dn2:26.4 | S: What seven? | T: What are the seven?
dn2:26.5 | S: The substances of earth, water, fire, air; pleasure, pain, and the soul is the seventh. | T: The body of earth, the body of water, the body of fire, the body of air, pleasure, pain, and the soul as the seventh.
dn2:26.6 | S: These seven substances are not made, not derived, not created, without a creator, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. | T: (none)
dn2:26.7 | S: They don’t move or deteriorate or obstruct each other. They’re unable to cause pleasure, pain, or both pleasure and pain to each other. | T: (none)
dn2:26.8 | S: And here there is no one who kills or who makes others kill; no one who learns or who educates others; no one who understands or who helps others understand. | T: Among these there is no killer nor one who causes killing; no hearer nor one who causes hearing; no cognizer nor one who causes cognition.
dn2:26.9 | S: If you chop off someone’s head with a sharp sword, you don’t take anyone’s life. | T: If someone were to cut off (another person’s) head with a sharp sword, he would not be taking (the other’s) life.
dn2:26.10 | S: The sword simply passes through the gap between the seven substances.’ | T: The sword merely passes through the space between the seven bodies.’
dn2:27.1 | S: And so, when I asked Pakudha Kaccāyana about the fruits of the ascetic life apparent in the present life, he answered with something else entirely. | T: “Thus, venerable sir, when I asked Pakudha Kaccāyana about a visible fruit of recluseship, he answered me in a completely irrelevant way.
dn2:27.2 | S: It was like someone who, when asked about a mango, answered with a breadfruit, or when asked about a breadfruit, answered with a mango. | T: Venerable sir, just as if one asked about a mango would speak about a breadfruit, or as if one asked about a breadfruit would speak about a mango,
dn2:27.3 | P: evameva kho me, bhante, pakudho kaccāyano sandiṭṭhikaṁ sāmaññaphalaṁ puṭṭho samāno aññena aññaṁ byākāsi. | T: in the same way, when I asked Pakudha Kaccāyana about a visible fruit of recluseship, he answered me in a completely irrelevant way.
dn2:27.4 | S: I thought: | T: Then, venerable sir, I thought to myself:
dn2:27.5 | S: ‘How on earth could one such as I presume to rebuke an ascetic or brahmin living in my realm?’ | T: ‘One like myself should not think of troubling a recluse or brahmin living in his realm.’
dn2:27.6 | S: So I neither approved nor rejected that statement of Pakudha Kaccāyana. | T: So I neither rejoiced in the statement of Pakudha Kaccāyana nor did I reject it.
dn2:27.7 | S: I was displeased, but did not express my displeasure. Neither accepting what he said nor contradicting it, I rose from my seat and left. | T: But though I neither rejoiced in it nor rejected it, I still felt dissatisfied, yet did not utter a word of dissatisfaction. Without accepting his doctrine, without embracing it, I got up from my seat and left.
dn2:28.0 | S: 3.5. The Doctrine of the Jain Ascetic of the Ñātika Clan | T: The Doctrine of Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta
dn2:28.1 | S: This one time, sir, I approached the Jain Ñātika and exchanged greetings with him. | T: “Another time, venerable sir, I approached Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, exchanged greetings and courtesies with him,
dn2:28.2 | S: When the greetings and polite conversation were over, I sat down to one side, and asked him the same question. | T: and sat down to one side. I then asked him (as in §14) if he could point out a fruit of recluseship visible here and now.
dn2:28.3 | P: ‘yathā nu kho imāni, bho aggivessana, puthusippāyatanāni …pe… | T: (none)
dn2:28.4 | P: sakkā nu kho, bho aggivessana, evameva diṭṭheva dhamme sandiṭṭhikaṁ sāmaññaphalaṁ paññapetun’ti? | T: (none)
dn2:29.1 | S: He said: | T: “When I had finished speaking, Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta said to me:
dn2:29.2 | S: ‘Great king, consider a Jain ascetic who is restrained in the fourfold constraint. | T: ‘Great king, a Nigaṇṭha, a knotless one, is restrained with a fourfold restraint.
dn2:29.3 | S: And how is a Jain ascetic restrained in the fourfold constraint? | T: How so?
dn2:29.4 | S: It’s when a Jain ascetic is restrained in all that is to be restrained, is bridled in all that is to be restrained, has shaken off evil in all that is to be restrained, and is curbed in all that is to be restrained. | T: Herein, great king, a Nigaṇṭha is restrained with regard to all water; he is endowed with the avoidance of all evil; he is cleansed by the avoidance of all evil; he is suffused with the avoidance of all evil.
dn2:29.5 | S: That’s how a Jain ascetic is restrained in the fourfold constraint. | T: (none)
dn2:29.6 | S: When a Jain ascetic is restrained in the fourfold constraint, | T: Great king, when a Nigaṇṭha is restrained with this fourfold restraint,
dn2:29.7 | S: they’re called a knotless one who is self-realized, self-controlled, and steadfast.’ | T: he is called a knotless one who is self-perfected, self-controlled, and self-established.’
dn2:30.1 | S: And so, when I asked the Jain Ñātika about the fruits of the ascetic life apparent in the present life, he answered with the fourfold constraint. | T: “Thus, venerable sir, when I asked Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta about a visible fruit of recluseship, he explained to me the fourfold restraint.
dn2:30.2 | S: It was like someone who, when asked about a mango, answered with a breadfruit, or when asked about a breadfruit, answered with a mango. | T: Venerable sir, just as if one asked about a mango would speak about a breadfruit, or as if one asked about a breadfruit would speak about a mango,
dn2:30.3 | P: evameva kho me, bhante, nigaṇṭho nāṭaputto sandiṭṭhikaṁ sāmaññaphalaṁ puṭṭho samāno cātuyāmasaṁvaraṁ byākāsi. | T: in the same way, when I asked Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta about a visible fruit of recluseship, he explained to me the fourfold restraint.
dn2:30.4 | S: I thought: | T: Then, venerable sir, I thought to myself:
dn2:30.5 | S: ‘How on earth could one such as I presume to rebuke an ascetic or brahmin living in my realm?’ | T: ‘One like myself should not think of troubling a recluse or brahmin living in his realm.’
dn2:30.6 | S: So I neither approved nor rejected that statement of the Jain Ñātika. | T: So I neither rejoiced in the statement of Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, nor did I reject it.
dn2:30.7 | S: I was displeased, but did not express my displeasure. Neither accepting what he said nor contradicting it, I rose from my seat and left. | T: But though I neither rejoiced in it nor rejected it, I still felt dissatisfied, yet did not utter a word of dissatisfaction. Without accepting his doctrine, without embracing it, I got up from my seat and left.”
dn2:31.0 | S: 3.6. The Doctrine of Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta | T: The Doctrine of Sañjaya Belaṭṭhaputta
dn2:31.1 | S: This one time, sir, I approached Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta and exchanged greetings with him. | T: “Another time, venerable sir, I approached Sañjaya Belaṭṭhaputta, exchanged greetings and courtesies with him,
dn2:31.2 | S: When the greetings and polite conversation were over, I sat down to one side, and asked him the same question. | T: and sat down to one side. I then asked him (as in §14) if he could point out any fruit of recluseship visible here and now.
dn2:31.3 | P: ‘yathā nu kho imāni, bho sañcaya, puthusippāyatanāni …pe… | T: (none)
dn2:31.4 | P: sakkā nu kho, bho sañcaya, evameva diṭṭheva dhamme sandiṭṭhikaṁ sāmaññaphalaṁ paññapetun’ti? | T: (none)
dn2:32.1 | S: He said: | T: “When I had finished speaking, Sañjaya Belaṭṭhaputta said to me:
dn2:32.2 | S: ‘Suppose you were to ask me whether there is another world. If I believed that to be the case, I would say so. | T: ‘If you ask me: “Is there a world beyond?” If I thought that there is a world beyond, I would declare to you “There is a world beyond.”
dn2:32.3 | S: But I don’t say it’s like this. I don’t say it’s like that. I don’t say it’s otherwise. I don’t say it’s not so. And I don’t deny it’s not so. | T: But I do not say “It is this way,” nor “It is that way,” nor “It is otherwise.” I do not say “It is not so,” nor do I say “It is not not so.”
dn2:32.4 | S: Suppose you were to ask me whether there is no other world … | T: ‘Similarly, you might ask me the following questions: “Is there no world beyond?”
dn2:32.5 | S: whether there both is and is not another world … | T: “Is it that there both is and is not a world beyond?”
dn2:32.6 | S: whether there neither is nor is not another world … | T: “Is it that there neither is nor is not a world beyond?”
dn2:32.7 | S: whether there are beings who are reborn spontaneously … | T: “Are there beings who have taken rebirth?”
dn2:32.8 | S: whether there are no beings who are reborn spontaneously … | T: “Are there no beings who have taken rebirth?”
dn2:32.9 | S: whether there both are and are not beings who are reborn spontaneously … | T: “Is it that there both are and are not beings who have taken rebirth?”
dn2:32.10 | S: whether there neither are nor are not beings who are reborn spontaneously … | T: “Is it that there neither are nor are not beings who have taken rebirth?”
dn2:32.11 | S: whether there is fruit and result of good and bad deeds … | T: “Is there fruit and result of good and bad actions?”
dn2:32.12 | S: whether there is no fruit and result of good and bad deeds … | T: “Is there no fruit and result of good and bad actions?”
dn2:32.13 | S: whether there both is and is not fruit and result of good and bad deeds … | T: “Is it that there both are and are not fruit and result of good and bad actions?”
dn2:32.14 | S: whether there neither is nor is not fruit and result of good and bad deeds … | T: “Is it that there neither are nor are not fruit and result of good and bad actions?”
dn2:32.15 | S: whether a realized one still exists after death … | T: “Does the Tathāgata exist after death?”
dn2:32.16 | S: whether a realized one no longer exists after death … | T: “Does the Tathāgata not exist after death?”
dn2:32.17 | S: whether a realized one both still exists and no longer exists after death … | T: “Does the Tathāgata both exist and not exist after death?”
dn2:32.18 | S: whether a realized one neither still exists nor no longer exists after death. If I believed that to be the case, I would say so. | T: “Does the Tathāgata neither exist nor not exist after death?” ‘If I thought that it was so, I would declare to you “It is so.”
dn2:32.19 | S: But I don’t say it’s like this. I don’t say it’s like that. I don’t say it’s otherwise. I don’t say it’s not so. And I don’t deny it’s not so.’ | T: But do I not say “It is this way,” nor “It is that way,” nor “It is otherwise.” I do not say “It is not so,” nor do I say “It is not not so.”’
dn2:33.1 | S: And so, when I asked Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta about the fruits of the ascetic life apparent in the present life, he answered with flip-flopping. | T: “Thus, venerable sir, when I asked Sañjaya Belaṭṭhaputta about a visible fruit of recluseship, he answered me evasively.
dn2:33.2 | S: It was like someone who, when asked about a mango, answered with a breadfruit, or when asked about a breadfruit, answered with a mango. | T: Venerable sir, just as if one asked about a mango would speak about a breadfruit, or as if one asked about a breadfruit would speak about a mango,
dn2:33.3 | P: evameva kho me, bhante, sañcayo belaṭṭhaputto sandiṭṭhikaṁ sāmaññaphalaṁ puṭṭho samāno vikkhepaṁ byākāsi. | T: in the same way, when I asked Sañjaya Belaṭṭhaputta about a visible fruit of recluseship, he answered me evasively.
dn2:33.4 | S: I thought: | T: (none)
dn2:33.5 | S: ‘This is the most foolish and stupid of all these ascetics and brahmins! | T: (none)
dn2:33.6 | S: How on earth can he answer with flip-flopping when asked about the fruits of the ascetic life apparent in the present life?’ | T: (none)
dn2:33.7 | S: I thought: | T: Then, venerable sir, I thought to myself:
dn2:33.8 | S: ‘How on earth could one such as I presume to rebuke an ascetic or brahmin living in my realm?’ | T: ‘One like myself should not think of troubling a recluse or brahmin living in his realm.’
dn2:33.9 | S: So I neither approved nor rejected that statement of Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta. | T: So I neither rejoiced in the statement of Sañjaya Belaṭṭhaputta nor did I reject it.
dn2:33.10 | S: I was displeased, but did not express my displeasure. Neither accepting what he said nor contradicting it, I rose from my seat and left. | T: But though I neither rejoiced in it nor rejected it, I still felt dissatisfied, yet did not utter a word of dissatisfaction. Without accepting his doctrine, without embracing it, I got up from my seat and left.
dn2:34.0.1 | S: 4. The Fruits of the Ascetic Life | T: (none)
dn2:34.0.2 | S: 4.1. The First Fruit of the Ascetic Life | T: The First Visible Fruit of Recluseship
dn2:34.1 | S: And so I ask the Buddha: | T: “So, venerable sir, I ask the Exalted One:
dn2:34.2 | S: Sir, there are many different professional fields. | T: There are, venerable sir, various crafts,
dn2:34.3 | S: These include elephant marshals, cavalry, charioteers, archers, bannermen, adjutants, food servers, warrior-chiefs, princes, chargers, great warriors, heroes, leather-clad soldiers, and sons of bondservants. | T: such as elephant trainers, horse trainers, charioteers, archers, standard bearers, camp marshals, commandos, high royal officers, front-line soldiers, bull-warriors, military heroes, mail-clad warriors, domestic slaves,
dn2:34.4 | S: They also include bakers, barbers, bathroom attendants, cooks, garland-makers, dyers, embroiderers, basket-makers, potters, accountants, finger-talliers, or those following any similar professions. All these live off the fruits of their profession which are apparent in this very life. | T: confectioners, barbers, bath attendants, cooks, garland-makers, laundrymen, weavers, basket-makers, potters, statisticians, accountants, and various other crafts of a similar nature. All those (who practise these crafts) enjoy here and now the visible fruits of their craft.
dn2:34.5 | S: With that they make themselves happy and pleased. They make their parents, their children and partners, and their friends and colleagues happy and pleased. And they establish an uplifting religious donation for ascetics and brahmins that’s conducive to heaven, ripens in happiness, and leads to heaven. | T: They obtain happiness and joy themselves, and they give happiness and joy to their parents, their wives and children, their friends and colleagues. They establish an excellent presentation of gifts to recluses and brahmins—leading to heaven, ripening in happiness, conducing to a heavenly rebirth.
dn2:34.6 | S: Sir, can you point out a fruit of the ascetic life that’s likewise apparent in this very life?” | T: Is it possible, venerable sir, to point out any fruit of recluseship that is similarly visible here and now?”
dn2:34.7 | S: “I can, Great King. | T: “It is, great king.
dn2:34.8 | S: Well then, I’ll ask you about this in return, and you can answer as you like. | T: But let me question you about this matter. Answer as you think fit.
dn2:35.1 | S: What do you think, Great King? | T: “What do you think, great king?
dn2:35.2 | S: Suppose you had a person who was a bondservant, a worker. They get up before you and go to bed after you, and are obliging, behaving nicely and speaking politely, and gazing up at your face. | T: Suppose you have a slave, a workman who rises up before you, retires after you, does whatever you want, acts always for your pleasure, speaks politely to you, and is ever on the lookout to see that you are satisfied.
dn2:35.3 | S: They’d think: | T: The thought might occur to him:
dn2:35.4 | S: ‘The outcome and result of good deeds is just so incredible, so amazing! | T: ‘It is wonderful and marvellous, the destiny and result of meritorious deeds.
dn2:35.5 | S: For this King Ajātasattu is a human being, and so am I. | T: For this King Ajātasattu is a human being, and I too am a human being,
dn2:35.6 | S: Yet he amuses himself, supplied and provided with the five kinds of sensual stimulation as if he were a god. | T: yet King Ajātasattu enjoys himself fully endowed and supplied with the five strands of sense pleasure as if he were a god,
dn2:35.7 | S: Whereas I’m his bondservant, his worker. I get up before him and go to bed after him, and am obliging, behaving nicely and speaking politely, and gazing up at his face. | T: while I am his slave, his workman—rising before him, retiring after him, doing whatever he wants, acting always for his pleasure, speaking politely to him, ever on the lookout to see that he is satisfied.
dn2:35.8 | S: I really should do good deeds. | T: I could be like him if I were to do meritorious deeds.
dn2:35.9 | S: Why don’t I shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness?’ | T: Let me then shave off my hair and beard, put on saffron robes, and go forth from home to homelessness.’
dn2:35.10 | S: After some time, that is what they do. | T: “After some time he shaves off his hair and beard, puts on saffron robes, and goes forth from home to homelessness.
dn2:35.11 | S: Having gone forth they’d live restrained in body, speech, and mind, living content with nothing more than food and clothes, delighting in seclusion. | T: Having gone forth he dwells restrained in body, speech, and mind, content with the simplest food and shelter, delighting in solitude.
dn2:35.12 | S: And suppose your men were to report all this to you. | T: Suppose your men were to report all this to you.
dn2:35.13 | P: ‘yagghe, deva, jāneyyāsi, yo te so puriso dāso kammakāro pubbuṭṭhāyī pacchānipātī kiṅkārapaṭissāvī manāpacārī piyavādī mukhullokako; | T: (none)
dn2:35.14 | P: so, deva, kesamassuṁ ohāretvā kāsāyāni vatthāni acchādetvā agārasmā anagāriyaṁ pabbajito. | T: (none)
dn2:35.15 | P: So evaṁ pabbajito samāno kāyena saṁvuto viharati, vācāya saṁvuto viharati, manasā saṁvuto viharati, ghāsacchādanaparamatāya santuṭṭho, abhirato paviveke’ti. | T: (none)
dn2:35.16 | S: Would you say to them: | T: Would you say:
dn2:35.17 | S: ‘Bring that person to me! Let them once more be my bondservant, my worker’?” | T: ‘Bring that man back to me, men. Let him again become my slave, my workman, rising before me, retiring after me, doing whatever I want, acting always for my pleasure, speaking politely to me, ever on the lookout to see that I am satisfied.’?”
dn2:36.1 | S: “No, sir. | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.
dn2:36.2 | S: Rather, I would bow to them, rise in their presence, and offer them a seat. I’d invite them to accept robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. And I’d organize their lawful guarding and protection.” | T: Rather, we would pay homage to him, rise up out of respect for him, invite him to a seat, and invite him to accept from us robes, almsfood, dwelling and medicinal requirements. And we would provide him righteous protection, defence, and security.”
dn2:36.3 | S: “What do you think, Great King? | T: “What do you think, great king?
dn2:36.4 | S: If this is so, is there a fruit of the ascetic life apparent in the present life or not?” | T: If such is the case, is there or is there not a visible fruit of recluseship?”
dn2:36.5 | S: “Clearly, sir, there is.” | T: “There certainly is, venerable sir.”
dn2:36.6 | S: “This is the first fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in this very life, which I point out to you.” | T: “This, great king, is the first fruit of recluseship, visible here and now, that I point out to you.”
dn2:37.0 | S: 4.2. The Second Fruit of the Ascetic Life | T: The Second Visible Fruit of Recluseship
dn2:37.1 | S: “But sir, can you point out another fruit of the ascetic life that’s likewise apparent in this very life?” | T: “Is it possible, venerable sir, to point out some other fruit of recluseship visible here and now?”
dn2:37.2 | S: “I can, Great King. | T: “It is, great king.
dn2:37.3 | S: Well then, I’ll ask you about this in return, and you can answer as you like. | T: But let me question you about this matter. Answer as you think fit.
dn2:37.4 | S: What do you think, Great King? | T: “What do you think, great king?
dn2:37.5 | S: Suppose you had a person who was a farmer, a householder, a hard worker, someone who builds up their capital. | T: Suppose there is a farmer, a householder, who pays taxes to maintain the royal revenue.
dn2:37.6 | S: They’d think: | T: The thought might occur to him:
dn2:37.7 | S: ‘The outcome and result of good deeds is just so incredible, so amazing! | T: ‘It is wonderful and marvellous, the destiny and result of meritorious deeds.
dn2:37.8 | S: For this King Ajātasattu is a human being, and so am I. | T: For this King Ajātasattu is a human being, and I too am a human being.
dn2:37.9 | S: Yet he amuses himself, supplied and provided with the five kinds of sensual stimulation as if he were a god. | T: Yet King Ajātasattu enjoys himself fully endowed and supplied with the five strands of sense pleasure as if he were a god,
dn2:37.10 | S: Whereas I’m a farmer, a householder, a hard worker, someone who builds up their capital. | T: while I am a farmer, a householder, who pays taxes to maintain the royal revenue.
dn2:37.11 | S: I really should do good deeds. | T: I could be like him if I were to do meritorious deeds.
dn2:37.12 | S: Why don’t I shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness?’ | T: Let me then shave off my hair and beard, put on saffron robes, and go forth from home to homelessness.’
