## mn65, continued
mn65:11.11 | S: or a follower by faith: | T: a faith-follower, and I told him:
mn65:11.12 | S: ‘Please, mendicant, be a bridge for me to cross over the mud.’ Would they cross over themselves, or struggle to get out of it, or just say no?” | T: ‘Come, bhikkhu, be a plank for me across the mud.’ Would he walk across himself, or would he dispose his body otherwise, or would he say ‘No’?”
mn65:11.13 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “No, venerable sir.”
mn65:12.1 | S: “What do you think, Bhaddāli? | T: “What do you think, Bhaddāli?
mn65:12.2 | S: At that time were you freed both ways, freed by wisdom, a direct witness, attained to view, freed by faith, a follower of teachings, or a follower by faith?” | T: Were you on that occasion one liberated-in-both-ways or one liberated-by-wisdom or a body-witness or one attained-to-view or one liberated-by-faith or a Dhamma-follower or a faith-follower?”
mn65:12.3 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “No, venerable sir.”
mn65:12.4 | S: “Weren’t you vacuous, hollow, and mistaken?” | T: “Bhaddāli, on that occasion were you not empty, hollow, and mistaken?”
mn65:13.1 | S: “Yes, sir. | T: “Yes, venerable sir.
mn65:13.2 | S: I made a mistake … | T: Venerable sir, a transgression overcame me, in that like a fool, confused and blundering, when a training precept was being made known by the Blessed One, when the Sangha of bhikkhus was undertaking the training, I declared my refusal to comply.
mn65:13.3 | S: Please, sir, accept my mistake for what it is, so I will restrain myself in future.” | T: Venerable sir, may the Blessed One forgive my transgression seen as such for the sake of restraint in the future.”
mn65:13.4 | S: “Indeed, Bhaddāli, you made a mistake. … | T: “Surely, Bhaddāli, a transgression overcame you, in that like a fool, confused and blundering, when a training precept was being made known by me, when the Sangha of bhikkhus was undertaking the training, you declared your refusal to comply.
mn65:13.5 | S: But since you have recognized your mistake for what it is, and have dealt with it properly, I accept it. | T: But since you see your transgression as such and make amends in accordance with the Dhamma, we forgive you;
mn65:13.6 | S: For it is growth in the training of the Noble One to recognize a mistake for what it is, deal with it properly, and commit to restraint in the future. | T: for it is growth in the Noble One’s Discipline when one sees one’s transgression as such and makes amends in accordance with the Dhamma by undertaking restraint for the future.
mn65:14.1 | S: Bhaddāli, take a mendicant who doesn’t fulfill the training according to the Teacher’s instructions. | T: “Here, Bhaddāli, some bhikkhu does not fulfil the training in the Teacher’s Dispensation.
mn65:14.2 | S: They think, | T: He considers thus:
mn65:14.3 | S: ‘Why don’t I frequent a secluded lodging—a wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw. | T: ‘Suppose I were to resort to a secluded resting place: the forest, the root of a tree, a mountain, a ravine, a hillside cave, a charnel ground, a jungle thicket, an open space, a heap of straw—
mn65:14.4 | S: Hopefully I’ll realize a superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.’ | T: perhaps I might realise a superhuman state, a distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.’
mn65:14.5 | S: So they frequent a secluded lodging. | T: He resorts to some such secluded resting place.
mn65:14.6 | S: While they’re living withdrawn, they’re reprimanded by the Teacher, by sensible spiritual companions after examination, by deities, and by themselves. | T: While he lives thus withdrawn, the Teacher censures him, wise companions in the holy life who have made investigation censure him, gods censure him, and he censures himself.
mn65:14.7 | S: Being reprimanded in this way, they don’t realize any superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones. | T: Being censured in this way by the Teacher, by wise companions in the holy life, by gods, and by himself, he realises no superhuman state, no distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.
mn65:14.8 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn65:14.9 | S: Because that’s how it is when someone doesn’t fulfill the training according to the Teacher’s instructions. | T: That is how it is with one who does not fulfil the training in the Teacher’s Dispensation.
mn65:15.1 | S: But take a mendicant who does fulfill the training according to the Teacher’s instructions. | T: “Here, Bhaddāli, some bhikkhu does fulfil the training in the Teacher’s Dispensation.
mn65:15.2 | S: They think, | T: He considers thus:
mn65:15.3 | S: ‘Why don’t I frequent a secluded lodging—a wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw. | T: ‘Suppose I were to resort to a secluded resting place: the forest, the root of a tree, a mountain, a ravine, a hillside cave, a charnel ground, a jungle thicket, an open space, a heap of straw—
mn65:15.4 | S: Hopefully I’ll realize a superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.’ | T: perhaps I might realise a superhuman state, a distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.’
mn65:15.5 | S: They frequent a secluded lodging—a wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw. | T: He resorts to some such secluded resting place.
mn65:15.6 | S: While they’re living withdrawn, they’re not reprimanded by the Teacher, by sensible spiritual companions after examination, by deities, or by themselves. | T: While he lives thus withdrawn, the Teacher does not censure him, wise companions in the holy life who have made investigation do not censure him, gods do not censure him, and he does not censure himself.
mn65:15.7 | S: Not being reprimanded in this way, they realize a superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones. | T: Being uncensured in this way by the Teacher, by wise companions in the holy life, by gods, and by himself, he realises a superhuman state, a distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.
mn65:16.1 | S: Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: “Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, he enters upon and abides in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
mn65:16.2 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn65:16.3 | S: Because that’s what happens when someone fulfills the training according to the Teacher’s instructions. | T: That is how it is with one who fulfils the training in the Teacher’s Dispensation.
mn65:17.1 | S: Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: “With the stilling of applied and sustained thought, he enters upon and abides in the second jhāna…
mn65:17.2 | S: Why is that? | T: (none)
mn65:17.3 | S: Because that’s what happens when someone fulfills the training according to the Teacher’s instructions. | T: (none)
mn65:17.4 | S: Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and remains in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, experiencing for themselves the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’ | T: With the fading away as well of rapture…he enters upon and abides in the third jhāna…
mn65:17.5 | S: Why is that? | T: (none)
mn65:17.6 | S: Because that’s what happens when someone fulfills the training according to the Teacher’s instructions. | T: (none)
mn65:17.7 | S: Furthermore, with the giving up of pleasure and pain and the disappearance of former happiness and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. | T: With the abandoning of pleasure and pain…he enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna…
mn65:17.8 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn65:17.9 | S: Because that’s what happens when someone fulfills the training according to the Teacher’s instructions. | T: That is how it is with one who fulfils the training in the Teacher’s Dispensation.
mn65:18.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward recollection of past lives. | T: “When his concentrated mind is thus purified and bright, unblemished, rid of imperfection, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs it to knowledge of the recollection of past lives…as MN51,
mn65:18.2 | S: They recollect many kinds of past lives, that is, one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. … They recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details. | T: §24…Thus with their aspects and particulars he recollects his manifold past lives.
mn65:18.3 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn65:18.4 | S: Because that’s what happens when someone fulfills the training according to the Teacher’s instructions. | T: That is how it is with one who fulfils the training in the Teacher’s Dispensation.
mn65:19.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings. | T: “When his concentrated mind is thus purified and bright…attained to imperturbability, he directs it to knowledge of the passing away and reappearance of beings…as MN51,
mn65:19.2 | S: With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds: ‘These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. … they’re reborn in the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. … they’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’ And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman … they understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. | T: §25…Thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, he understands how beings pass on according to their actions.
mn65:19.3 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn65:19.4 | S: Because that’s what happens when someone fulfills the training according to the Teacher’s instructions. | T: That is how it is with one who fulfils the training in the Teacher’s Dispensation.
mn65:20.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward knowledge of the ending of defilements. | T: “When his concentrated mind is thus purified and bright…attained to imperturbability, he directs it to knowledge of the destruction of the taints.
mn65:20.2 | S: They truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. | T: He understands as it actually is: ‘This is suffering’…as MN51,
mn65:20.3 | S: They truly understand: ‘These are defilements’ … ‘This is the origin of defilements’ … ‘This is the cessation of defilements’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements’. | T: §26…He understands as it actually is: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of the taints.’
mn65:21.1 | S: Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. | T: “When he knows and sees thus, his mind is liberated from the taint of sensual desire, from the taint of being, and from the taint of ignorance.
mn65:21.2 | S: When they’re freed, they know they’re freed. | T: When it is liberated there comes the knowledge: ‘It is liberated.’
mn65:21.3 | S: They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’ | T: He understands: ‘Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.’
mn65:21.4 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn65:21.5 | S: Because that’s what happens when someone fulfills the training according to the Teacher’s instructions.” | T: That is how it is with one who fulfils the training in the Teacher’s Dispensation.”
mn65:22.1 | S: When he said this, Venerable Bhaddāli said to the Buddha, | T: Thereupon the venerable Bhaddāli asked:
mn65:22.2 | S: “What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why they punish some monk, repeatedly pressuring him? | T: “Venerable sir, what is the cause, what is the reason, why they take action against some bhikkhu here by repeatedly admonishing him?
mn65:22.3 | S: And what is the cause, what is the reason why they don’t similarly punish another monk, repeatedly pressuring him?” | T: What is the cause, what is the reason, why they do not take such action against some bhikkhu here by repeatedly admonishing him?”
mn65:23.1 | S: “Take a monk who is a frequent offender with many offenses. | T: “Here, Bhaddāli, some bhikkhu is a constant offender with many offences.
mn65:23.2 | S: When admonished by the monks, he dodges the issue, distracting the discussion with irrelevant points. He displays annoyance, hate, and bitterness. He doesn’t proceed properly, he doesn’t fall in line, he doesn’t proceed to get past it, and he doesn’t say: ‘I’ll do what pleases the Saṅgha.’ | T: When he is corrected by the bhikkhus, he prevaricates, leads the talk aside, shows disturbance, hate, and bitterness; he does not proceed rightly, he does not comply, he does not clear himself, he does not say: ‘Let me so act that the Sangha will be satisfied.’
mn65:23.3 | S: In such a case, the monks say: | T: Bhikkhus, taking account of this matter, think:
mn65:23.4 | S: ‘Reverends, this monk is a frequent offender, with many offenses. | T: (none)
mn65:23.5 | S: When admonished by the monks, he dodges the issue, distracting the discussion with irrelevant points. He displays annoyance, hate, and bitterness. He doesn’t proceed properly, he doesn’t fall in line, he doesn’t proceed to get past it, and he doesn’t say: “I’ll do what pleases the Saṅgha.” | T: (none)
mn65:23.6 | S: It’d be good for the venerables to examine this monk in such a way that this disciplinary issue is not quickly settled.’ | T: ‘It would be good if the venerable ones examine this bhikkhu in such a way that this litigation against him is not settled too quickly.’
mn65:23.7 | S: And that’s what they do. | T: And the bhikkhus examine that bhikkhu in such a way that the litigation against him is not settled too quickly.
mn65:24.1 | S: Take some other monk who is a frequent offender with many offenses. | T: “But here some bhikkhu is a constant offender with many offences.
mn65:24.2 | S: When admonished by the monks, he doesn’t dodge the issue, distracting the discussion with irrelevant points. He doesn’t display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. He proceeds properly, he falls in line, he proceeds to get past it, and he says: ‘I’ll do what pleases the Saṅgha.’ | T: When he is corrected by the bhikkhus, he does not prevaricate, lead the talk aside, or show disturbance, hate, and bitterness; he proceeds rightly, he complies, he clears himself, he says: ‘Let me so act that the Sangha will be satisfied.’
mn65:24.3 | S: In such a case, the monks say: | T: Bhikkhus, taking account of this matter, think:
mn65:24.4 | S: ‘Reverends, this monk is a frequent offender, with many offenses. | T: (none)
mn65:24.5 | S: When admonished by the monks, he doesn’t dodge the issue, distracting the discussion with irrelevant points. He doesn’t display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. He proceeds properly, he falls in line, he proceeds to get past it, and he says: “I’ll do what pleases the Saṅgha.” | T: (none)
mn65:24.6 | S: It’d be good for the venerables to examine this monk in such a way that this disciplinary issue is quickly settled.’ | T: ‘It would be good if the venerable ones examine this bhikkhu in such a way that this litigation against him is settled quickly.’
mn65:24.7 | S: And that’s what they do. | T: And the bhikkhus examine that bhikkhu in such a way that the litigation against him is settled quickly.
mn65:25.1 | S: Take some other monk who is an occasional offender without many offenses. | T: “Here some bhikkhu is a chance offender without many offences.
mn65:25.2 | S: When admonished by the monks, he dodges the issue … | T: When he is corrected by the bhikkhus, he prevaricates…
mn65:25.3 | S: In such a case, the monks say: | T: (none)
mn65:25.4 | S: ‘Reverends, this monk is an occasional offender without many offenses. | T: (none)
mn65:25.5 | S: When admonished by the monks, he dodges the issue … | T: (none)
mn65:25.6 | S: It’d be good for the venerables to examine this monk in such a way that this disciplinary issue is not quickly settled.’ | T: repeat rest of §23…
mn65:25.7 | S: And that’s what they do. | T: And the bhikkhus examine that bhikkhu in such a way that the litigation against him is not settled too quickly.
mn65:26.1 | S: Take some other monk who is an occasional offender without many offenses. | T: “But here some bhikkhu is a chance offender without many offences.
mn65:26.2 | S: When admonished by the monks, he doesn’t dodge the issue … | T: When he is corrected by the bhikkhus, he does not prevaricate…
mn65:26.3 | S: In such a case, the monks say: | T: (none)
mn65:26.4 | S: ‘Reverends, this monk is an occasional offender without many offenses. | T: (none)
mn65:26.5 | S: When admonished by the monks, he doesn’t dodge the issue … | T: (none)
mn65:26.6 | S: It’d be good for the venerables to examine this monk in such a way that this disciplinary issue is quickly settled.’ | T: repeat rest of §24…
mn65:26.7 | S: And that’s what they do. | T: And the bhikkhus examine that bhikkhu in such a way that the litigation against him is settled quickly.
mn65:27.1 | S: Take some other monk who gets by with mere faith and fondness. | T: “Here some bhikkhu progresses by a measure of faith and love.
mn65:27.2 | S: In such a case, the monks say: | T: In this case bhikkhus consider thus:
mn65:27.3 | S: ‘Reverends, this monk gets by with mere faith and fondness. | T: ‘Friends, this bhikkhu progresses by a measure of faith and love.
mn65:27.4 | S: Suppose we punish him, repeatedly pressuring him— | T: (none)
mn65:27.5 | S: no, let him not lose what little faith and fondness he has!’ | T: Let him not lose that measure of faith and love, as he may if we take action against him by repeatedly admonishing him.’
mn65:28.1 | S: Suppose there was a person with one eye. Their friends and colleagues, relatives and kin would protect that one eye: | T: Suppose a man had only one eye; then his friends and companions, his kinsmen and relatives, would guard his eye, thinking:
mn65:28.2 | S: ‘Let them not lose the one eye that they have!’ | T: ‘Let him not lose his one eye.’
mn65:28.3 | S: In the same way, some monk gets by with mere faith and fondness. | T: So too, some bhikkhu progresses by a measure of faith and love…
mn65:28.4 | S: In such a case, the monks say: | T: (none)
mn65:28.5 | S: ‘Reverends, this monk gets by with mere faith and fondness. | T: (none)
mn65:28.6 | S: Suppose we punish him, repeatedly pressuring him— | T: (none)
mn65:28.7 | S: no, let him not lose what little faith and love he has!’ | T: ‘Let him not lose that measure of faith and love, as he may if we take action against him by repeatedly admonishing him.’
mn65:28.8 | S: This is the cause, this is the reason why they punish some monk, repeatedly pressuring him. | T: “This is the cause, this is the reason, why they take action against some bhikkhu here by repeatedly admonishing him;
mn65:28.9 | S: And this is the cause, this is the reason why they don’t similarly punish another monk, repeatedly pressuring him.” | T: this is the cause, this is the reason, why they do not take such action against some bhikkhu here by repeatedly admonishing him.”
mn65:29.1 | S: “What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why there used to be fewer training rules but more enlightened mendicants? | T: “Venerable sir, what is the cause, what is the reason, why there were previously fewer training rules and more bhikkhus became established in final knowledge?
mn65:29.2 | S: And what is the cause, what is the reason why these days there are more training rules and fewer enlightened mendicants?” | T: What is the cause, what is the reason, why there are now more training rules and fewer bhikkhus become established in final knowledge?”
mn65:30.1 | S: “That’s how it is, Bhaddāli. When sentient beings are in decline and the true teaching is disappearing there are more training rules and fewer enlightened mendicants. | T: “That is how it is, Bhaddāli. When beings are deteriorating and the true Dhamma is disappearing, then there are more training rules and fewer bhikkhus become established in final knowledge.
mn65:30.2 | S: The Teacher does not lay down training rules for disciples as long as certain defiling influences have not appeared in the Saṅgha. | T: The Teacher does not make known the training rule for disciples until certain things that are the basis for taints become manifest here in the Sangha;
mn65:30.3 | S: But when such defiling influences appear in the Saṅgha, the Teacher lays down training rules for disciples to protect against them. | T: but when certain things that are the basis for taints become manifest here in the Sangha, then the Teacher makes known the training rule for disciples in order to ward off those things that are the basis for taints.
mn65:31.1 | S: And they don’t appear until the Saṅgha has attained a great size, | T: “Those things that are the basis for taints do not become manifest here in the Sangha until the Sangha has reached greatness;
mn65:31.2 | P: Yato ca kho, bhaddāli, saṅgho mahattaṁ patto hoti, atha idhekacce āsavaṭṭhānīyā dhammā saṅghe pātubhavanti. | T: but when the Sangha has reached greatness, then those things that are the basis for taints become manifest here in the Sangha,
mn65:31.3 | P: Atha satthā sāvakānaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññāpeti tesaṁyeva āsavaṭṭhānīyānaṁ dhammānaṁ paṭighātāya. | T: and then the Teacher makes known the training rule for disciples in order to ward off those things that are the basis for taints.
mn65:31.4 | S: an abundance of material support and fame, learning, and seniority. | T: Those things that are the basis for taints do not become manifest here in the Sangha until the Sangha has reached the acme of worldly gain…the acme of fame…great learning…long-standing renown;
mn65:31.5 | S: But when the Saṅgha has attained these things, then such defiling influences appear in the Saṅgha, and the Teacher lays down training rules for disciples to protect against them. | T: but when the Sangha has reached long-standing renown, then those things that are the basis for taints become manifest here in the Sangha, and then the Teacher makes known the training rule for disciples in order to ward off those things that are the basis for taints.
mn65:32.1 | S: There were only a few of you there at the time when I taught the exposition on the simile of the thoroughbred colt. | T: “There were few of you, Bhaddāli, when I taught an exposition of the Dhamma through the simile of the young thoroughbred colt.
mn65:32.2 | S: Do you remember that, Bhaddāli?” | T: Do you remember that, Bhaddāli?”
mn65:32.3 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “No, venerable sir.”
mn65:32.4 | S: “What do you believe the reason for that is?” | T: “To what reason do you attribute that?”
mn65:32.5 | S: “Sir, it’s surely because for a long time now I haven’t fulfilled the training according to the Teacher’s instructions.” | T: “Venerable sir, I have long been one who did not fulfil the training in the Teacher’s Dispensation.”
mn65:32.6 | S: “That’s not the only reason, Bhaddāli. | T: “That is not the only cause or the only reason.
mn65:32.7 | S: Rather, for a long time I have encompassed your mind and known: | T: But rather, by encompassing your mind with my mind, I have long known you thus:
mn65:32.8 | S: ‘While I’m teaching, this futile man doesn’t pay attention, apply the mind, concentrate wholeheartedly, or actively listen to the teaching.’ | T: ‘When I am teaching the Dhamma, this misguided man does not heed it, does not give it attention, does not engage it with all his mind, does not hear the Dhamma with eager ears.’
mn65:32.9 | S: Still, Bhaddāli, I shall teach the exposition on the simile of the thoroughbred colt. | T: Still, Bhaddāli, I will teach you an exposition of the Dhamma through the simile of the young thoroughbred colt.
mn65:32.10 | S: Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.” | T: Listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”
mn65:32.11 | S: “Yes, sir,” Bhaddāli replied. | T: “Yes, venerable sir,” the venerable Bhaddāli replied.
mn65:32.12 | S: The Buddha said this: | T: The Blessed One said this:
mn65:33.1 | S: “Suppose a deft horse trainer were to obtain a fine thoroughbred. First of all he’d make it get used to wearing the bit. | T: “Bhaddāli, suppose a clever horse-trainer obtains a fine thoroughbred colt. He first makes him get used to wearing the bit.
mn65:33.2 | S: Because it has not done this before, it still resorts to some twists, ducks, and dodges. | T: While the colt is being made to get used to wearing the bit, because he is doing something that he has never done before, he displays some contortion, writhing, and vacillation,
mn65:33.3 | S: But with regular and gradual practice its bad behavior is extinguished. | T: but through constant repetition and gradual practice, he becomes peaceful in that action.
mn65:33.4 | S: When it has done this, the horse trainer next makes it get used to wearing the harness. | T: “When the colt has become peaceful in that action, the horse-trainer further makes him get used to wearing the harness.
mn65:33.5 | S: Because it has not done this before, it still resorts to some twists, ducks, and dodges. | T: While the colt is being made to get used to wearing the harness, because he is doing something that he has never done before, he displays some contortion, writhing, and vacillation,
mn65:33.6 | S: But with regular and gradual practice its bad behavior is extinguished. | T: but through constant repetition and gradual practice, he becomes peaceful in that action.
mn65:33.7 | S: When it has done this, the horse trainer next makes it get used to walking in procession, circling, prancing, galloping, charging, the protocols and customs of court, and in the very best speed, fleetness, and camaraderie. | T: “When the colt has become peaceful in that action, the horse-trainer further makes him act in keeping in step, in running in a circle, in prancing, in galloping, in charging, in the kingly qualities, in the kingly heritage, in the highest speed, in the highest fleetness, in the highest gentleness.
mn65:33.8 | S: Because it has not done this before, it still resorts to some twists, ducks, and dodges. | T: While the colt is being made to get used to doing these things, because he is doing something that he has never done before, he displays some contortion, writhing, and vacillation,
mn65:33.9 | S: But with regular and gradual practice its bad behavior is extinguished. | T: but through constant repetition and gradual practice, he becomes peaceful in those actions.
mn65:33.10 | S: When it has done this, the horse trainer next rewards it with a grooming and a rub down. | T: “When the colt has become peaceful in these actions, the horse-trainer further rewards him with a rubbing down and a grooming.
mn65:33.11 | S: A fine royal thoroughbred with these ten factors is worthy of a king, fit to serve a king, and reckoned as a factor of kingship. | T: When a fine thoroughbred colt possesses these ten factors, he is worthy of the king, in the king’s service, and considered one of the factors of a king.
mn65:34.1 | S: In the same way, a mendicant with ten qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with cupped palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world. | T: “So too, Bhaddāli, when a bhikkhu possesses ten qualities, he is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
mn65:34.2 | S: What ten? | T: What are the ten?
mn65:34.3 | S: It’s when a mendicant has an adept’s right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. | T: Here, Bhaddāli, a bhikkhu possesses the right view of one beyond training, the right intention of one beyond training, the right speech of one beyond training, the right action of one beyond training, the right livelihood of one beyond training, the right effort of one beyond training, the right mindfulness of one beyond training, the right concentration of one beyond training, the right knowledge of one beyond training, and the right deliverance of one beyond training.
mn65:34.4 | S: A mendicant with these ten qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with cupped palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.” | T: When a bhikkhu possesses these ten qualities, he is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.”
mn65:34.5 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: That is what the Blessed One said.
mn65:34.6 | S: Satisfied, Venerable Bhaddāli approved what the Buddha said. | T: The venerable Bhaddāli was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
mn65:34.7 | P: Bhaddālisuttaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ pañcamaṁ. | T: (none)

## mn103
mn103:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
mn103:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Kusinārā in the Forest of Offerings. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Kusinārā, in the Grove of Offerings.
mn103:1.3 | S: There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, | T: There he addressed the bhikkhus thus:
mn103:1.4 | S: “Mendicants!” | T: “Bhikkhus.”—
mn103:1.5 | S: “Venerable sir,” they replied. | T: “Venerable sir,” they replied.
mn103:1.6 | S: The Buddha said this: | T: The Blessed One said this:
mn103:2.1 | S: “Mendicants, is this what you think of me? | T: “What do you think about me, bhikkhus?
mn103:2.2 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama teaches the Dhamma for the sake of robes, almsfood, lodgings, or rebirth in this or that state.’” | T: That the recluse Gotama teaches the Dhamma for the sake of robes? Or that the recluse Gotama teaches the Dhamma for the sake of almsfood? Or that the recluse Gotama teaches the Dhamma for the sake of a resting place? Or that the recluse Gotama teaches the Dhamma for the sake of some better state of being?”
mn103:2.3 | S: “No sir, we don’t think of you that way.” | T: “We do not think thus about the Blessed One:
mn103:2.4 | P: ‘cīvarahetu vā samaṇo gotamo dhammaṁ deseti, piṇḍapātahetu vā samaṇo gotamo dhammaṁ deseti, senāsanahetu vā samaṇo gotamo dhammaṁ deseti, itibhavābhavahetu vā samaṇo gotamo dhammaṁ desetī’”ti. | T: ‘The recluse Gotama teaches the Dhamma for the sake of robes, or for the sake of almsfood, or for the sake of a resting place, or for the sake of some better state of being.’”
mn103:2.5 | S: “If you don’t think of me that way, | T: “So, bhikkhus, you do not think thus about me:
mn103:2.6 | P: ‘cīvarahetu vā samaṇo gotamo dhammaṁ deseti …pe… | T: ‘The recluse Gotama teaches the Dhamma for the sake of robes…or for the sake of some better state of being.’
mn103:2.7 | P: itibhavābhavahetu vā samaṇo gotamo dhammaṁ desetī’ti; | T: (none)
mn103:2.8 | S: what then do you think of me?” | T: Then what do you think about me?”
mn103:2.9 | S: “We think of you this way: | T: “Venerable sir, we think thus about the Blessed One:
mn103:2.10 | S: ‘The Buddha is sympathetic and wants what’s best for us. | T: ‘The Blessed One is compassionate and seeks our welfare;
mn103:2.11 | S: He teaches out of sympathy.’” | T: he teaches the Dhamma out of compassion.’”
mn103:2.12 | S: “So it seems you think | T: “So, bhikkhus, you think thus about me:
mn103:2.13 | P: ‘anukampako bhagavā hitesī; | T: ‘The Blessed One is compassionate and seeks our welfare;
mn103:2.14 | S: that I teach out of sympathy. | T: he teaches the Dhamma out of compassion.’
mn103:3.1 | S: In that case, each and every one of you should train in the things I have taught from my direct knowledge, that is: | T: “So, bhikkhus, these things that I have taught you after directly knowing them—that is,
mn103:3.2 | S: the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, the four right efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven awakening factors, and the noble eightfold path. You should train in these things in harmony, appreciating each other, without dispute. | T: the four foundations of mindfulness, the four right kinds of striving, the four bases for spiritual power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven enlightenment factors, the Noble Eightfold Path—in these things you should all train in concord, with mutual appreciation, without disputing.
mn103:4.1 | S: As you do so, it may happen that two mendicants disagree about the teaching. | T: “While you are training in concord, with mutual appreciation, without disputing, two bhikkhus might make different assertions about the higher Dhamma.
mn103:5.1 | S: Now, you might think, | T: “Now if you should think thus:
mn103:5.2 | S: ‘These two venerables disagree on both the meaning and the phrasing.’ So you should approach whichever mendicant you think is most amenable and say to them: | T: ‘These venerable ones differ about both the meaning and the phrasing,’ then whichever bhikkhu you think is the more reasonable should be approached and addressed thus:
mn103:5.3 | S: ‘The venerables disagree on the meaning and the phrasing. | T: ‘The venerable ones differ about both the meaning and the phrasing.
mn103:5.4 | S: But the venerables should know that this is how | T: The venerable ones should know that it is for this reason that there is difference about the meaning and difference about the phrasing;
mn103:5.5 | S: such disagreement on the meaning and the phrasing comes to be. | T: (none)
mn103:5.6 | S: Please don’t get into a dispute about this.’ | T: let them not fall into a dispute.’
mn103:5.7 | S: Then you should approach whichever mendicant they think is most amenable among those who side with the other party and say to them: | T: Then whichever bhikkhu you think is the most reasonable of those who side together on the opposite part should be approached and addressed thus:
mn103:5.8 | S: ‘The venerables disagree on the meaning and the phrasing. | T: ‘The venerable ones differ about the meaning and the phrasing.
mn103:5.9 | S: But the venerables should know that this is how | T: The venerable ones should know that it is for this reason that there is difference about the meaning and difference about the phrasing;
mn103:5.10 | S: such disagreement on the meaning and the phrasing comes to be. | T: (none)
mn103:5.11 | S: Please don’t get into a dispute about this.’ | T: let them not fall into a dispute.’
mn103:5.12 | S: So you should remember what has been incorrectly memorized as incorrectly memorized and what has been correctly memorized as correctly memorized. | T: So what has been wrongly grasped should be borne in mind as wrongly grasped.
mn103:5.13 | S: Remembering this, you should speak on the teaching and the training. | T: Bearing in mind what has been wrongly grasped as wrongly grasped, what is Dhamma and what is Discipline should be expounded.
mn103:6.1 | S: Now, you might think, | T: “Now if you should think thus:
mn103:6.2 | S: ‘These two venerables disagree on the meaning but agree on the phrasing.’ So you should approach whichever mendicant you think is most amenable and say to them: | T: ‘These venerable ones differ about the meaning but agree about the phrasing,’ then whichever bhikkhu you think is the more reasonable should be approached and addressed thus:
mn103:6.3 | S: ‘The venerables disagree on the meaning but agree on the phrasing. | T: ‘The venerable ones differ about the meaning but agree about the phrasing.
mn103:6.4 | S: But the venerables should know that this is how | T: The venerable ones should know that it is for this reason that there is difference about the meaning but agreement about the phrasing;
mn103:6.5 | S: such disagreement on the meaning and agreement on the phrasing comes to be. | T: (none)
mn103:6.6 | S: Please don’t get into a dispute about this.’ | T: let them not fall into a dispute.’
mn103:6.7 | S: Then you should approach whichever mendicant they think is most amenable among those who side with the other party and say to them: | T: Then whichever bhikkhu you think is the most reasonable of those who side together on the opposite part should be approached and addressed thus:
mn103:6.8 | S: ‘The venerables disagree on the meaning but agree on the phrasing. | T: ‘The venerable ones differ about the meaning but agree about the phrasing.
mn103:6.9 | S: But the venerables should know that this is how | T: The venerable ones should know that it is for this reason that there is difference about the meaning but agreement about the phrasing;
mn103:6.10 | S: such disagreement on the meaning and agreement on the phrasing comes to be. | T: (none)
mn103:6.11 | S: Please don’t get into a dispute about this.’ | T: let them not fall into a dispute.’
mn103:6.12 | S: So you should remember what has been incorrectly memorized as incorrectly memorized and what has been correctly memorized as correctly memorized. | T: So what has been wrongly grasped should be borne in mind as wrongly grasped and what has been rightly grasped should be borne in mind as rightly grasped.
mn103:6.13 | S: Remembering this, you should speak on the teaching and the training. | T: Bearing in mind what has been wrongly grasped as wrongly grasped, and bearing in mind what has been rightly grasped as rightly grasped, what is Dhamma and what is Discipline should be expounded.
mn103:7.1 | S: Now, you might think, | T: “Now if you think thus:
mn103:7.2 | S: ‘These two venerables agree on the meaning but disagree on the phrasing.’ So you should approach whichever mendicant you think is most amenable and say to them: | T: ‘These venerable ones agree about the meaning but differ about the phrasing,’ then whichever bhikkhu you think is the more reasonable should be approached and addressed thus:
mn103:7.3 | S: ‘The venerables agree on the meaning but disagree on the phrasing. | T: ‘The venerable ones agree about the meaning but differ about the phrasing.
mn103:7.4 | S: But the venerables should know that this is how | T: The venerable ones should know that it is for this reason that there is agreement about the meaning but difference about the phrasing.
mn103:7.5 | S: such agreement on the meaning and disagreement on the phrasing comes to be. | T: (none)
mn103:7.6 | S: But the phrasing is a minor matter. | T: But the phrasing is a mere trifle.
mn103:7.7 | S: Please don’t get into a dispute about something so minor.’ | T: Let the venerable ones not fall into a dispute over a mere trifle.’
mn103:7.8 | S: Then you should approach whichever mendicant they think is most amenable among those who side with the other party and say to them: | T: Then whichever bhikkhu you think is the most reasonable of those who side together on the opposite part should be approached and addressed thus:
mn103:7.9 | S: ‘The venerables agree on the meaning but disagree on the phrasing. | T: ‘The venerable ones agree about the meaning but differ about the phrasing.
mn103:7.10 | S: But the venerables should know that this is how | T: The venerable ones should know that it is for this reason that there is agreement about the meaning but difference about the phrasing.
mn103:7.11 | S: such agreement on the meaning and disagreement on the phrasing comes to be. | T: (none)
mn103:7.12 | S: But the phrasing is a minor matter. | T: But the phrasing is a mere trifle.
mn103:7.13 | S: Please don’t get into a dispute about something so minor.’ | T: Let the venerable ones not fall into a dispute over a mere trifle.’
mn103:7.14 | S: So you should remember what has been correctly memorized as correctly memorized and what has been incorrectly memorized as incorrectly memorized. | T: So what has been rightly grasped should be borne in mind as rightly grasped and what has been wrongly grasped should be borne in mind as wrongly grasped.
mn103:7.15 | S: Remembering this, you should speak on the teaching and the training. | T: Bearing in mind what has been rightly grasped as rightly grasped, and bearing in mind what has been wrongly grasped as wrongly grasped, what is Dhamma and what is Discipline should be expounded.
mn103:8.1 | S: Now, you might think, | T: “Now if you should think thus:
mn103:8.2 | S: ‘These two venerables agree on both the meaning and the phrasing.’ So you should approach whichever mendicant you think is most amenable and say to them: | T: ‘These venerable ones agree about both the meaning and the phrasing,’ then whichever bhikkhu you think is the more reasonable should be approached and addressed thus:
mn103:8.3 | S: ‘The venerables agree on both the meaning and the phrasing. | T: ‘The venerable ones agree about both the meaning and the phrasing.
mn103:8.4 | S: But the venerables should know that this is how | T: The venerable ones should know that it is for this reason that there is agreement about both the meaning and the phrasing;
mn103:8.5 | S: they come to agree on the meaning and the phrasing. | T: (none)
mn103:8.6 | S: Please don’t get into a dispute about this.’ | T: let the venerable ones not fall into a dispute.’
mn103:8.7 | S: Then you should approach whichever mendicant they think is most amenable among those who side with the other party and say to them: | T: Then whichever bhikkhu you think is the most reasonable of those who side together on the opposite part should be approached and addressed thus:
mn103:8.8 | S: ‘The venerables agree on both the meaning and the phrasing. | T: ‘The venerable ones agree about both the meaning and the phrasing.
mn103:8.9 | S: But the venerables should know that this is how | T: The venerable ones should know that it is for this reason that there is agreement about both the meaning and the phrasing;
mn103:8.10 | S: they come to agree on the meaning and the phrasing. | T: (none)
mn103:8.11 | S: Please don’t get into a dispute about this.’ | T: let the venerable ones not fall into a dispute.’
mn103:8.12 | S: So you should remember what has been correctly memorized as correctly memorized. | T: So what has been rightly grasped should be borne in mind as rightly grasped.
mn103:8.13 | S: Remembering this, you should speak on the teaching and the training. | T: Bearing in mind what has been rightly grasped as rightly grasped, what is Dhamma and what is Discipline should be expounded.
mn103:9.1 | S: As you train in harmony, appreciating each other, without dispute, one of the mendicants might commit an offense or transgression. | T: “While you are training in concord, with mutual appreciation, without disputing, some bhikkhu might commit an offence or a transgression.
mn103:10.1 | S: In such a case, you should not be in a hurry to accuse them. The individual should be examined like this: | T: “Now, bhikkhus, you should not hurry to reprove him; rather, the person should be examined thus:
mn103:10.2 | S: ‘I won’t be troubled and the other individual won’t be hurt, for they’re not irritable and acrimonious. They don’t hold fast to their views, but let them go easily. I can draw them away from the unskillful and establish them in the skillful.’ | T: ‘I shall not be troubled and the other person will not be hurt; for the other person is not given to anger and resentment, he is not firmly attached to his view and he relinquishes easily, and I can make that person emerge from the unwholesome and establish him in the wholesome. ’
mn103:10.3 | S: If that’s what you think, then it’s appropriate to speak to them. | T: If such occurs to you, bhikkhus, it is proper to speak.
mn103:11.1 | S: But suppose you think this: | T: “Then it may occur to you, bhikkhus:
mn103:11.2 | S: ‘I will be troubled and the other individual will be hurt, for they’re irritable and acrimonious. However, they don’t hold fast to their views, but let them go easily. I can draw them away from the unskillful and establish them in the skillful. | T: ‘I shall not be troubled, but the other person will be hurt, for the other person is given to anger and resentment. However, he is not firmly attached to his view and he relinquishes easily, and I can make that person emerge from the unwholesome and establish him in the wholesome.
mn103:11.3 | S: But for the other individual to get hurt is a minor matter. | T: It is a mere trifle that the other person will be hurt,
mn103:11.4 | S: It’s more important | T: but it is a much greater thing that I can make that person emerge from the unwholesome and establish him in the wholesome. ’
mn103:11.5 | S: that I can draw them away from the unskillful and establish them in the skillful.’ | T: (none)
mn103:11.6 | S: If that’s what you think, then it’s appropriate to speak to them. | T: If such occurs to you, bhikkhus, it is proper to speak.
mn103:12.1 | S: But suppose you think this: | T: “Then it may occur to you, bhikkhus:
mn103:12.2 | S: ‘I will be troubled but the other individual won’t be hurt, for they’re not irritable and acrimonious. However, they hold fast to their views, refusing to let go. Nevertheless, I can draw them away from the unskillful and establish them in the skillful. | T: ‘I shall be troubled, but the other person will not be hurt; for the other person is not given to anger and resentment, though he is firmly attached to his view and he relinquishes with difficulty; yet I can make that person emerge from the unwholesome and establish him in the wholesome.
mn103:12.3 | S: But for me to be troubled is a minor matter. | T: It is a mere trifle that I shall be troubled,
mn103:12.4 | S: It’s more important | T: but it is a much greater thing that I can make that person emerge from the unwholesome and establish him in the wholesome.’
mn103:12.5 | S: that I can draw them away from the unskillful and establish them in the skillful.’ | T: (none)
mn103:12.6 | S: If that’s what you think, then it’s appropriate to speak to them. | T: If such occurs to you, bhikkhus, it is proper to speak.
mn103:13.1 | S: But suppose you think this: | T: “Then it may occur to you, bhikkhus:
mn103:13.2 | S: ‘I will be troubled and the other individual will be hurt, for they’re irritable and acrimonious. And they hold fast to their views, refusing to let go. Nevertheless, I can draw them away from the unskillful and establish them in the skillful. | T: ‘I shall be troubled and the other person will be hurt; for the other person is given to anger and resentment, and he is firmly attached to his view and he relinquishes with difficulty; yet I can make that person emerge from the unwholesome and establish him in the wholesome.
mn103:13.3 | S: But for me to be troubled and the other individual to get hurt is a minor matter. | T: It is a mere trifle that I shall be troubled and the other person hurt,
mn103:13.4 | S: It’s more important | T: but it is a much greater thing that I can make that person emerge from the unwholesome and establish him in the wholesome.’
mn103:13.5 | S: that I can draw them away from the unskillful and establish them in the skillful.’ | T: (none)
mn103:13.6 | S: If that’s what you think, then it’s appropriate to speak to them. | T: If such occurs to you, bhikkhus, it is proper to speak.
mn103:14.1 | S: But suppose you think this: | T: “Then it may occur to you, bhikkhus:
mn103:14.2 | S: ‘I will be troubled and the other individual will be hurt, for they’re irritable and acrimonious. And they hold fast to their views, refusing to let go. I cannot draw them away from the unskillful and establish them in the skillful.’ | T: ‘I shall be troubled and the other person will be hurt; for the other person is given to anger and resentment, and he is firmly attached to his view and he relinquishes with difficulty; and I cannot make that person emerge from the unwholesome and establish him in the wholesome.’
mn103:14.3 | S: Don’t underestimate the value of equanimity regarding such an individual. | T: One should not underrate equanimity towards such a person.
mn103:15.1 | S: As you train in harmony, appreciating each other, without quarreling, the sides might continue to bring up settled issues with each other, with contempt for each other’s views, resentful, bitter, and exasperated. | T: “While you are training in concord, with mutual appreciation, without disputing, there might arise mutual verbal friction, insolence in views, mental annoyance, bitterness, and dejection.
mn103:15.2 | S: In this case you should approach whichever mendicant you think is most amenable among those who side with one party and say to them: | T: Then whichever bhikkhu you think is the most reasonable of those who side together on the one part should be approached and addressed thus:
mn103:15.3 | S: ‘Reverend, as we were training, the sides continued to bring up settled issues with each other. If the Ascetic knew about this, would he criticize it?’ | T: ‘While we were training in concord, friend, with mutual appreciation, without disputing, there arose mutual verbal friction, insolence in views, mental annoyance, bitterness, and dejection. If the Recluse knew, would he censure that?’
mn103:15.4 | S: Answering rightly, the mendicant should say: | T: Answering rightly, the bhikkhu would answer thus:
mn103:15.5 | S: ‘Yes, reverend, he would.’ | T: ‘While we were training…If the Recluse knew, he would censure that.’
mn103:15.6 | S: ‘But without giving that up, reverend, can one realize extinguishment?’ | T: “‘But, friend, without abandoning that thing, can one realise Nibbāna?’
mn103:15.7 | S: Answering rightly, the mendicant should say: | T: Answering rightly, the bhikkhu would answer thus:
mn103:15.8 | S: ‘No, reverend, one cannot.’ | T: ‘Friend, without abandoning that thing, one cannot realise Nibbāna.’
mn103:16.1 | S: Then you should approach whichever mendicant they think is most amenable among those who side with the other party and say to them: | T: “Then whichever bhikkhu you think is the most reasonable of those who side together on the opposite part should be approached and addressed thus:
mn103:16.2 | S: ‘Reverend, as we were training, the sides continued to bring up settled issues with each other. If the Ascetic knew about this, would he criticize it?’ | T: ‘While we were training in concord, friend, with mutual appreciation, without disputing, there arose mutual verbal friction, insolence in views, mental annoyance, bitterness, and dejection. If the Recluse knew, would he censure that?’
mn103:16.3 | S: Answering rightly, the mendicant should say: | T: Answering rightly, the bhikkhu would answer thus:
mn103:16.4 | S: ‘Yes, reverend, he would.’ | T: ‘While we were training…If the Recluse knew, he would censure that.’
mn103:16.5 | S: ‘But without giving that up, reverend, can one realize extinguishment?’ | T: “‘But, friend, without abandoning that thing, can one realise Nibbāna?’
mn103:16.6 | S: Answering rightly, the mendicant should say: | T: Answering rightly, the bhikkhu would answer thus:
mn103:16.7 | S: ‘No, reverend, one cannot.’ | T: ‘Friend, without abandoning that thing, one cannot realise Nibbāna.’
mn103:17.1 | S: If others should ask that mendicant: | T: “If others should ask that bhikkhu thus:
mn103:17.2 | S: ‘Were you the venerable who drew those mendicants away from the unskillful and established them in the skillful?’ | T: ‘Was it the venerable one who made those bhikkhus emerge from the unwholesome and established them in the wholesome?’
mn103:17.3 | S: Answering rightly, the mendicant should say: | T: answering rightly, the bhikkhu would answer thus:
mn103:17.4 | S: ‘Well, reverends, I approached the Buddha. He taught me the Dhamma. After hearing that teaching I explained it to those mendicants. | T: ‘Here, friends, I went to the Blessed One. The Blessed One taught me the Dhamma. Having heard that Dhamma, I spoke to those bhikkhus.
mn103:17.5 | S: When those mendicants heard that teaching they were drawn away from the unskillful and established in the skillful.’ | T: The bhikkhus heard that Dhamma, and they emerged from the unwholesome and became established in the wholesome.’
mn103:17.6 | S: Answering in this way, that mendicant doesn’t glorify themselves or put others down. They answer in line with the teaching, with no legitimate grounds for rebuttal and criticism.” | T: Answering thus, the bhikkhu neither exalts himself nor disparages others; he answers in accordance with the Dhamma in such a way that nothing which provides a ground for censure can be legitimately deduced from his assertion.”
mn103:17.7 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: That is what the Blessed One said.
mn103:17.8 | S: Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said. | T: The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
mn103:17.9 | P: Kintisuttaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ tatiyaṁ. | T: (none)

