## dn2, continued
dn2:83.0.1 | S: 4.3.3. The Eight Knowledges | T: (none)
dn2:83.0.2 | S: 4.3.3.1. Knowledge and Vision | T: Insight Knowledge
dn2:83.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward knowledge and vision. | T: “When his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright, unblemished, free from defects, malleable, wieldy, steady and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to knowledge and vision.
dn2:83.2 | S: They understand: | T: He understands thus:
dn2:83.3 | S: ‘This body of mine is formed. It’s made up of the four principal states, produced by mother and father, built up from rice and porridge, liable to impermanence, to wearing away and erosion, to breaking up and destruction. | T: ‘This is my body, having material form, composed of the four primary elements, originating from father and mother, built up out of rice and gruel, impermanent, subject to rubbing and pressing, to dissolution and dispersion.
dn2:83.4 | S: And this consciousness of mine is attached to it, tied to it.’ | T: And this is my consciousness, supported by it and bound up with it.’
dn2:84.1 | S: Suppose there was a beryl gem that was naturally lustrous, eight-faceted, well-worked, transparent, clear, and unclouded, endowed with all good qualities. | T: “Great king, suppose there were a beautiful beryl gem of purest water, eight-faceted, well cut, clear, limpid, flawless, endowed with all excellent qualities.
dn2:84.2 | S: And it was strung with a thread of blue, yellow, red, white, or golden brown. | T: And through it there would run a blue, yellow, red, white, or brown thread.
dn2:84.3 | S: And a person with clear eyes were to take it in their hand and examine it: | T: A man with keen sight, taking it in his hand, would reflect upon it thus:
dn2:84.4 | S: ‘This beryl gem is naturally lustrous, eight-faceted, well-worked, transparent, clear, and unclouded, endowed with all good qualities. | T: ‘This is a beautiful beryl gem of purest water, eight faceted, well cut, clear, limpid, flawless, endowed with all excellent qualities.
dn2:84.5 | S: And it’s strung with a thread of blue, yellow, red, white, or golden brown.’ | T: And running through it there is this blue, yellow, red, white, or brown thread.’
dn2:84.6 | S: In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward knowledge and vision. | T: In the same way, great king, when his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright … the bhikkhu directs and inclines it to knowledge and vision
dn2:84.7 | P: So evaṁ pajānāti: | T: and understands thus:
dn2:84.8 | P: ‘ayaṁ kho me kāyo rūpī cātumahābhūtiko mātāpettikasambhavo odanakummāsūpacayo aniccucchādanaparimaddanabhedanaviddhaṁsanadhammo; | T: ‘This is my body, having material form ….
dn2:84.9 | P: idañca pana me viññāṇaṁ ettha sitaṁ ettha paṭibaddhan’ti. | T: and this is my consciousness, supported by it and bound up with it.’
dn2:84.10 | S: This too, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This, too, great king, is a visible fruit of recluseship more excellent and sublime than the previous ones.
dn2:85.0 | S: 4.3.3.2. Mind-Made Body | T: The Knowledge of the Mind-made Body
dn2:85.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward the creation of a mind-made body. | T: “When his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright, unblemished, free from defects, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to creating a mind-made body.
dn2:85.2 | S: From this body they create another body—formed, mind-made, whole in its major and minor limbs, not deficient in any faculty. | T: From this body he creates another body having material form, mind-made, complete in all its parts, not lacking any faculties.
dn2:86.1 | S: Suppose a person was to draw a reed out from its sheath. | T: “Great king, suppose a man were to draw out a reed from its sheath.
dn2:86.2 | S: They’d think: | T: He would think:
dn2:86.3 | S: ‘This is the reed, this is the sheath. The reed and the sheath are different things. The reed has been drawn out from the sheath.’ | T: ‘This is the reed; this is the sheath. The reed is one thing, the sheath another, but the reed has been drawn out from the sheath.’
dn2:86.4 | S: Or suppose a person was to draw a sword out from its scabbard. | T: Or suppose a man were to draw a sword out from its scabbard.
dn2:86.5 | S: They’d think: | T: He would think:
dn2:86.6 | S: ‘This is the sword, this is the scabbard. The sword and the scabbard are different things. The sword has been drawn out from the scabbard.’ | T: ‘This is the sword; this is the scabbard. The sword is one thing, the scabbard another, but the sword has been drawn out from the scabbard.’
dn2:86.7 | S: Or suppose a person was to draw a snake out from its slough. | T: Or suppose a man were to pull a snake out from its slough.
dn2:86.8 | S: They’d think: | T: He would think:
dn2:86.9 | S: ‘This is the snake, this is the slough. The snake and the slough are different things. The snake has been drawn out from the slough.’ | T: ‘This is the snake; this is the slough. The snake is one thing, the slough another, but the snake has been pulled out from the slough.’
dn2:86.10 | S: In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward the creation of a mind-made body. | T: In the same way, great king, when his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright … The bhikkhu directs and inclines it to creating a mind-made body.
dn2:86.11 | S: From this body they create another body—formed, mind-made, whole in its major and minor limbs, not deficient in any faculty. | T: From this body he creates another body having material form, mind-made, complete in all its parts, not lacking any faculties.
dn2:86.12 | S: This too, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This too, great king, is a visible fruit of recluseship more excellent and sublime than the previous ones.
dn2:87.0 | S: 4.3.3.3. Psychic Powers | T: The Knowledge of the Modes of Supernormal Power
dn2:87.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward psychic power. | T: “When his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright, unblemished, free from defects, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to the modes of supernormal power.
dn2:87.2 | S: They wield the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying themselves and becoming one again; materializing and dematerializing; going unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful; controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity. | T: He exercises the various modes of supernormal power: having been one, he becomes many and having been many, he becomes one; he appears and vanishes; he goes unimpeded through walls, ramparts, and mountains as if through space; he dives in and out of the earth as if it were water; he walks on water without sinking as if it were earth; sitting cross-legged he travels through space like a winged bird; with his hand he touches and strokes the sun and the moon, so mighty and powerful; he exercises mastery over the body as far as the Brahma-world.
dn2:88.1 | S: Suppose a deft potter or their apprentice had some well-prepared clay. They could produce any kind of pot that they like. | T: “Great king, suppose a skilled potter or his apprentice were to make and fashion out of well-prepared clay whatever kind of vessel he might desire.
dn2:88.2 | S: Or suppose a deft ivory-carver or their apprentice had some well-prepared ivory. They could produce any kind of ivory item that they like. | T: Or suppose a skilled ivory-worker or his apprentice were to make and fashion out of well-prepared ivory whatever kind of ivory work he might desire.
dn2:88.3 | S: Or suppose a deft goldsmith or their apprentice had some well-prepared gold. They could produce any kind of gold item that they like. | T: Or suppose a skilled goldsmith or his apprentice were to make and fashion out of well-prepared gold whatever kind of gold work he might desire.
dn2:88.4 | S: In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward psychic power. | T: In the same way, great king, when his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright … the bhikkhu directs and inclines it to the modes of supernormal power
dn2:88.5 | P: So anekavihitaṁ iddhividhaṁ paccanubhoti—ekopi hutvā bahudhā hoti, bahudhāpi hutvā eko hoti; āvibhāvaṁ tirobhāvaṁ tirokuṭṭaṁ tiropākāraṁ tiropabbataṁ asajjamāno gacchati seyyathāpi ākāse; pathaviyāpi ummujjanimujjaṁ karoti seyyathāpi udake; udakepi abhijjamāne gacchati seyyathāpi pathaviyā; ākāsepi pallaṅkena kamati seyyathāpi pakkhī sakuṇo; imepi candimasūriye evaṁmahiddhike evaṁmahānubhāve pāṇinā parāmasati parimajjati; yāva brahmalokāpi kāyena vasaṁ vatteti. | T: and exercises the various modes of supernormal power.
dn2:88.6 | S: This too, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This too, great king, is a visible fruit of recluseship more excellent and sublime than the previous ones.
dn2:89.0 | S: 4.3.3.4. Clairaudience | T: The Knowledge of the Divine Ear
dn2:89.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward clairaudience. | T: “When his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright, unblemished, free from defects, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to the divine ear-element.
dn2:89.2 | S: With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, they hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far. | T: With the divine ear-element, which is purified and surpasses the human, he hears both kinds of sound, the divine and the human, those which are distant and those which are near.
dn2:90.1 | S: Suppose there was a person traveling along the road. They’d hear the sound of drums, clay drums, horns, kettledrums, and tom-toms. They’d think: ‘That’s the sound of drums,’ and ‘that’s the sound of clay drums,’ and ‘that’s the sound of horns, kettledrums, and tom-toms.’ | T: “Great king, suppose a man travelling along a highway were to hear the sounds of kettledrums, tambours, horns, cymbals and tom-toms, and would think: ‘This is the sound of kettledrums, this is the sound of tambours, this the sound of horns, cymbals and tom-toms.’
dn2:90.2 | S: In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward clairaudience. | T: In the same way, great king, when his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright … the bhikkhu directs and inclines it to the divine ear-element.
dn2:90.3 | S: With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, they hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far. | T: With the divine ear-element, which is purified and surpasses the human, he hears both kinds of sound, the divine and the human, those which are distant and those which are near.
dn2:90.4 | S: This too, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This too, great king, is a visible fruit of recluseship more excellent and sublime than the previous ones.
dn2:91.0 | S: 4.3.3.5. Encompassing the Minds of Others | T: The Knowledge Encompassing the Minds of Others
dn2:91.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward encompassing the minds of others. | T: “When his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright, unblemished, free from defects, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to the knowledge of encompassing the minds (of others).
dn2:91.2 | S: They understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having encompassed them with their own mind. | T: He understands the minds of other beings and persons, having encompassed them with his own mind.
dn2:91.3 | S: They understand mind with greed as ‘mind with greed’, | T: He understands a mind with lust as a mind with lust and a mind without lust as a mind without lust;
dn2:91.4 | S: and mind without greed as ‘mind without greed’. | T: (none)
dn2:91.5 | S: They understand mind with hate … | T: he understands a mind with hatred as a mind with hatred and a mind without hatred as a mind without hatred;
dn2:91.6 | S: mind without hate … | T: (none)
dn2:91.7 | S: mind with delusion … | T: he understands a mind with delusion as a mind with delusion and a mind without delusion as a mind without delusion;
dn2:91.8 | S: mind without delusion … | T: (none)
dn2:91.9 | S: constricted mind … | T: he understands a contracted mind as a contracted mind and a distracted mind as a distracted mind;
dn2:91.10 | S: scattered mind … | T: (none)
dn2:91.11 | S: expansive mind … | T: he understands an exalted mind as an exalted mind and an unexalted mind as an unexalted mind;
dn2:91.12 | S: unexpansive mind … | T: (none)
dn2:91.13 | S: mind that is not supreme … | T: he understands a surpassable mind as a surpassable mind and an unsurpassable mind as an unsurpassable mind;
dn2:91.14 | S: mind that is supreme … | T: (none)
dn2:91.15 | S: immersed mind … | T: he understands a concentrated mind as a concentrated mind and an unconcentrated mind as an unconcentrated mind;
dn2:91.16 | S: unimmersed mind … | T: (none)
dn2:91.17 | S: freed mind … | T: he understands a liberated mind as a liberated mind and an unliberated mind as an unliberated mind.
dn2:91.18 | S: They understand unfreed mind as ‘unfreed mind’. | T: (none)
dn2:92.1 | S: Suppose there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of adornments, and they check their own reflection in a clean bright mirror or a clear bowl of water. If they had a spot they’d know ‘I have a spot,’ and if they had no spots they’d know ‘I have no spots.’ | T: “Great king, suppose a young man or woman, fond of ornaments, examining his or her own facial reflection in a pure bright mirror or in a bowl of clear water, would know, if there were a mole, ‘It has a mole,’ and if there were no mole, ‘It has no mole.’
dn2:92.2 | S: In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward encompassing the minds of others. | T: In the same way, great king, when his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright … the bhikkhu directs and inclines it to the knowledge of encompassing the minds (of others).
dn2:92.3 | S: They understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having encompassed them with their own mind. | T: He understands the minds of other beings and persons, having encompassed them with his own mind.
dn2:92.4 | P: sarāgaṁ vā cittaṁ ‘sarāgaṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: (none)
dn2:92.5 | P: vītarāgaṁ vā cittaṁ ‘vītarāgaṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: (none)
dn2:92.6 | P: sadosaṁ vā cittaṁ ‘sadosaṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: (none)
dn2:92.7 | P: vītadosaṁ vā cittaṁ ‘vītadosaṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: (none)
dn2:92.8 | P: samohaṁ vā cittaṁ ‘samohaṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: (none)
dn2:92.9 | P: vītamohaṁ vā cittaṁ ‘vītamohaṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: (none)
dn2:92.10 | P: saṅkhittaṁ vā cittaṁ ‘saṅkhittaṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: (none)
dn2:92.11 | P: vikkhittaṁ vā cittaṁ ‘vikkhittaṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: (none)
dn2:92.12 | P: mahaggataṁ vā cittaṁ ‘mahaggataṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: (none)
dn2:92.13 | P: amahaggataṁ vā cittaṁ ‘amahaggataṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: (none)
dn2:92.14 | P: sauttaraṁ vā cittaṁ ‘sauttaraṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: (none)
dn2:92.15 | P: anuttaraṁ vā cittaṁ ‘anuttaraṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: (none)
dn2:92.16 | P: samāhitaṁ vā cittaṁ ‘samāhitaṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: (none)
dn2:92.17 | P: asamāhitaṁ vā cittaṁ ‘asamāhitaṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: (none)
dn2:92.18 | P: vimuttaṁ vā cittaṁ ‘vimuttaṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: (none)
dn2:92.19 | P: avimuttaṁ vā cittaṁ ‘avimuttaṁ cittan’ti pajānāti. | T: (none)
dn2:92.20 | S: This too, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This too, great king, is a visible fruit of recluseship more excellent and sublime than the previous ones.
dn2:93.0 | S: 4.3.3.6. Recollection of Past Lives | T: The Knowledge of Recollecting Past Lives
dn2:93.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward recollection of past lives. | T: “When his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright, unblemished, free from defects, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to the knowledge of recollecting past lives.
dn2:93.2 | S: They recollect many kinds of past lives, that is, one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. They remember: ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ And so they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details. | T: He recollects his numerous past lives, that is, one birth, two births, three, four, or five births; ten, twenty, thirty, forty, or fifty births; a hundred births, a thousand births, a hundred thousand births; many aeons of world contraction, many aeons of world expansion, many aeons of world contraction and expansion, (recollecting): ‘There I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance; such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my span of life. Passing away from that state, I re-arose there. There too I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance; such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my span of life. Passing away from that state I re-arose here.’ Thus he recollects his numerous past lives in their modes and their details.
dn2:94.1 | S: Suppose a person was to leave their home village and go to another village. From that village they’d go to yet another village. And from that village they’d return to their home village. They’d think: ‘I went from my home village to another village. There I stood like this, sat like that, spoke like this, or kept silent like that. From that village I went to yet another village. There too I stood like this, sat like that, spoke like this, or kept silent like that. And from that village I returned to my home village.’ | T: “Great king, suppose a man were to go from his own village to another village, then from that village to still another village, and then from that village he would return to his own village. He would think to himself: ‘I went from my own village to that village. There I stood in such a way, sat in such a way, spoke in such a way, and remained silent in such a way. From that village I went to still another village. There too I stood in such a way, sat in such a way, spoke in such a way, and remained silent in such a way. From that village I returned to my own village.’
dn2:94.2 | S: In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward recollection of past lives. | T: In the same way, great king, when his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright … the bhikkhu directs and inclines it to the knowledge of recollecting past lives,
dn2:94.3 | P: So anekavihitaṁ pubbenivāsaṁ anussarati, seyyathidaṁ—ekampi jātiṁ dvepi jātiyo tissopi jātiyo catassopi jātiyo pañcapi jātiyo dasapi jātiyo vīsampi jātiyo tiṁsampi jātiyo cattālīsampi jātiyo paññāsampi jātiyo jātisatampi jātisahassampi jātisatasahassampi anekepi saṁvaṭṭakappe anekepi vivaṭṭakappe anekepi saṁvaṭṭavivaṭṭakappe, ‘amutrāsiṁ evaṁnāmo evaṅgotto evaṁvaṇṇo evamāhāro evaṁsukhadukkhappaṭisaṁvedī evamāyupariyanto, so tato cuto amutra udapādiṁ; tatrāpāsiṁ evaṁnāmo evaṅgotto evaṁvaṇṇo evamāhāro evaṁsukhadukkhappaṭisaṁvedī evamāyupariyanto, so tato cuto idhūpapanno’ti. Iti sākāraṁ sauddesaṁ anekavihitaṁ pubbenivāsaṁ anussarati. | T: and he recollects his numerous past lives in their modes and their details.
dn2:94.4 | S: This too, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This too, great king, is a visible fruit of recluseship, more excellent and sublime than the previous ones.
dn2:95.0 | S: 4.3.3.7. Clairvoyance | T: The Knowledge of the Divine Eye
dn2:95.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings. | T: “When his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright, unblemished, free from defects, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to the knowledge of the passing away and reappearance of beings.
dn2:95.2 | S: With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds: ‘These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’ And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. | T: With the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, he sees beings passing away and reappearing—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate—and he understands how beings fare according to their kamma, thus: ‘These beings—who were endowed with bad conduct of body, speech, and mind, who reviled the noble ones, held wrong views, and undertook actions governed by wrong views—with the breakup of the body, after death, have reappeared in the plane of misery, the bad destinations, the lower realms, in hell. But these beings—who were endowed with good conduct of body, speech, and mind, who did not revile the noble ones, held right views, and undertook actions governed by right views—with the breakup of the body, after death, have reappeared in the good destinations, in the heavenly world.’ Thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, he sees beings passing away and reappearing—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate—and he understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma.
dn2:96.1 | S: Suppose there was a stilt longhouse at the central square. A person with clear eyes standing there might see humans entering and leaving a house, walking along the streets and paths, and sitting at the central square. They’d think: ‘These are people entering and leaving a house, walking along the streets and paths, and sitting at the central square.’ | T: “Great king, suppose in a central square there were a building with an upper terrace, and a man with keen sight standing there were to see people entering a house, leaving it, walking along the streets, and sitting in the central square. He would think to himself: ‘Those people are entering the house, those are leaving it, those are walking along the streets, and those are sitting in the central square.’
dn2:96.2 | S: In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings. | T: In the same way, great king, when his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright … the bhikkhu directs and inclines it to the knowledge of the passing away and reappearance of beings.
dn2:96.3 | P: So dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena satte passati cavamāne upapajjamāne hīne paṇīte suvaṇṇe dubbaṇṇe sugate duggate, yathākammūpage satte pajānāti: ‘ime vata bhonto sattā kāyaduccaritena samannāgatā vacīduccaritena samannāgatā manoduccaritena samannāgatā ariyānaṁ upavādakā micchādiṭṭhikā micchādiṭṭhikammasamādānā, te kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā apāyaṁ duggatiṁ vinipātaṁ nirayaṁ upapannā. Ime vā pana bhonto sattā kāyasucaritena samannāgatā vacīsucaritena samannāgatā manosucaritena samannāgatā ariyānaṁ anupavādakā sammādiṭṭhikā sammādiṭṭhikammasamādānā. Te kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā sugatiṁ saggaṁ lokaṁ upapannā’ti. Iti dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena satte passati cavamāne upapajjamāne hīne paṇīte suvaṇṇe dubbaṇṇe sugate duggate; yathākammūpage satte pajānāti. | T: With the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, he sees beings passing away and reappearing, and he understands how beings fare according to their kamma.
dn2:96.4 | S: This too, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This too, great king, is a visible fruit of recluseship more excellent and sublime than the previous ones.
dn2:97.0 | S: 4.3.3.8. Ending of Defilements | T: The Knowledge of the Destruction of the Cankers
dn2:97.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward knowledge of the ending of defilements. | T: “When his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright, unblemished, free from defects, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to the knowledge of the destruction of the cankers.
dn2:97.2 | S: They truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. | T: He understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering.’ He understands as it really is: ‘This is the origin of suffering.’ He understands as it really is: ‘This is the cessation of suffering.’ He understands as it really is: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
dn2:97.3 | S: They truly understand: ‘These are defilements’ … ‘This is the origin of defilements’ … ‘This is the cessation of defilements’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements’. | T: He understands as it really is: ‘These are the cankers.’ He understands as it really is: ‘This is the origin of the cankers.’ He understands as it really is: ‘This is the cessation of the cankers.’ He understands as it really is: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of the cankers.’
dn2:97.4 | S: Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. | T: “Knowing and seeing thus, his mind is liberated from the canker of sensual desire, from the canker of existence, and from the canker of ignorance.
dn2:97.5 | S: When they’re freed, they know they’re freed. | T: When it is liberated, the knowledge arises: ‘It is liberated.’
dn2:97.6 | S: They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’ | T: He understands: ‘Destroyed is birth, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further beyond this.’
dn2:98.1 | S: Suppose that in a mountain glen there was a lake that was transparent, clear, and unclouded. A person with clear eyes standing on the bank would see the clams and mussels, pebbles and gravel, and schools of fish swimming about or staying still. They’d think: ‘This lake is transparent, clear, and unclouded. And here are the clams and mussels, pebbles and gravel, and schools of fish swimming about or staying still.’ | T: “Great king, suppose in a mountain glen there were a lake with clear water, limpid and unsullied. A man with keen sight, standing on the bank, would see oyster-shells, sand and pebbles, and shoals of fish moving about and keeping still. He would think to himself: ‘This is a lake with clear water, limpid and unsullied, and there within it are oyster-shells, sand and pebbles, and shoals of fish moving about and keeping still.’
dn2:98.2 | S: In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward knowledge of the ending of defilements. | T: “In the same way, great king, when his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright …. the bhikkhu directs and inclines it to the knowledge of the destruction of the cankers.
dn2:98.3 | P: ‘So idaṁ dukkhan’ti yathābhūtaṁ pajānāti, ‘ayaṁ dukkhasamudayo’ti yathābhūtaṁ pajānāti, ‘ayaṁ dukkhanirodho’ti yathābhūtaṁ pajānāti, ‘ayaṁ dukkhanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṁ pajānāti. | T: He understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering’ …
dn2:98.4 | P: ‘Ime āsavā’ti yathābhūtaṁ pajānāti, ‘ayaṁ āsavasamudayo’ti yathābhūtaṁ pajānāti, ‘ayaṁ āsavanirodho’ti yathābhūtaṁ pajānāti, ‘ayaṁ āsavanirodhagāminī paṭipadā’ti yathābhūtaṁ pajānāti. | T: (none)
dn2:98.5 | P: Tassa evaṁ jānato evaṁ passato kāmāsavāpi cittaṁ vimuccati, bhavāsavāpi cittaṁ vimuccati, avijjāsavāpi cittaṁ vimuccati, | T: (none)
dn2:98.6 | P: vimuttasmiṁ ‘vimuttam’iti ñāṇaṁ hoti, | T: (none)
dn2:98.7 | P: ‘khīṇā jāti, vusitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ, kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ, nāparaṁ itthattāyā’ti pajānāti. | T: He understands: ‘Destroyed is birth, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further beyond this.’
dn2:98.8 | S: This too, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This too, great king, is a visible fruit of recluseship more excellent and sublime than the previous ones.
dn2:98.9 | S: And, Great King, there is no other fruit of the ascetic life apparent in the present life which is better and finer than this.” | T: And, great king, there is no other fruit of recluseship higher or more sublime than this one.”
dn2:99.0 | S: 5. Ajātasattu Declares Himself a Lay Follower | T: King Ajātasattu Declares Himself a Lay Follower
dn2:99.1 | S: When the Buddha had spoken, King Ajātasattu said to him, | T: When the Exalted One had finished speaking, King Ajātasattu said to him:
dn2:99.2 | S: “Excellent, sir! Excellent! | T: “Excellent, venerable sir! Excellent, venerable sir!
dn2:99.3 | S: As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, the Buddha has made the teaching clear in many ways. | T: Just as if one were to turn upright what had been turned upside down, or to reveal what was hidden, or to point out the right path to one who was lost, or to bring a lamp into a dark place so that those with keen sight could see forms, in the same way, venerable sir, the Exalted One has revealed the Dhamma in numerous ways.
dn2:99.4 | S: I go for refuge to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. | T: I go for refuge to the Exalted One, to the Dhamma, and to the Bhikkhu Saṅgha.
dn2:99.5 | S: From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life. | T: Let the Exalted One accept me as a lay follower gone for refuge from this day onwards as long as I live.
dn2:99.6 | S: I made a mistake, sir. It was foolish, stupid, and unskillful of me to take the life of my father, a just and principled king, for the sake of authority. | T: “Venerable sir, a transgression overcame me. I was so foolish, so deluded, so unskilful that for the sake of rulership I took the life of my own father, a righteous man and a righteous king.
dn2:99.7 | S: Please, sir, accept my mistake for what it is, so I will restrain myself in future.” | T: Let the Exalted One acknowledge my transgression as a transgression for the sake of my restraint in the future.”
dn2:100.1 | S: “Indeed, Great King, you made a mistake. It was foolish, stupid, and unskillful of you to take the life of your father, a just and principled king, for the sake of sovereignty. | T: “Indeed, great king, a transgression overcame you. You were so foolish, so deluded, so unskilful that for the sake of rulership you took the life of your father, a righteous man and a righteous king.
dn2:100.2 | S: But since you have recognized your mistake for what it is, and have dealt with it properly, I accept it. | T: But since you have seen your transgression as a transgression and make amends for it according to the Dhamma, we acknowledge it.
dn2:100.3 | S: For it is growth in the training of the Noble One to recognize a mistake for what it is, deal with it properly, and commit to restraint in the future.” | T: For, great king, this is growth in the discipline of the Noble One: that a person sees his transgression as a transgression, makes amends for it according to the Dhamma, and achieves restraint in the future.”
dn2:101.1 | S: When the Buddha had spoken, King Ajātasattu said to him, | T: When this was said, King Ajātasattu said to the Exalted One:
dn2:101.2 | S: “Well, now, sir, I must go. I have many duties, and much to do.” | T: “Now, venerable sir, we must go. We have many tasks and duties.”
dn2:101.3 | S: “Please, Great King, go at your convenience.” | T: “Do whatever seems fit, great king.”
dn2:101.4 | S: Then the king, having approved and agreed with what the Buddha said, rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled him, keeping him on his right, before leaving. | T: Then King Ajātasattu rejoiced in the word of the Exalted One and thanked him for it. Rising from his seat, he paid homage to the Exalted One, circumambulated him, and departed.
dn2:102.1 | S: Soon after the king had left, the Buddha addressed the mendicants: | T: Soon after King Ajātasattu had left, the Exalted One addressed the bhikkhus:
dn2:102.2 | S: “The king is broken, mendicants, | T: “This king, bhikkhus, has ruined himself;
dn2:102.3 | S: he is ruined. | T: he has injured himself.
dn2:102.4 | S: If he had not taken the life of his father, a just and principled king, the stainless, immaculate vision of the Dhamma would have arisen in him in that very seat.” | T: Bhikkhus, if this king had not taken the life of his father, a righteous man and a righteous king, then in this very seat there would have arisen in him the dust-free, stainless eye of Dhamma.”
dn2:102.5 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: Thus spoke the Exalted One.
dn2:102.6 | S: Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said. | T: Elated in mind, the bhikkhus rejoiced in the Exalted One’s word.
dn2:102.7 | P: Sāmaññaphalasuttaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ dutiyaṁ. | T: Here ends the Sāmaññaphala Sutta

## mn7
mn7:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
mn7:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
mn7:1.3 | S: There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, | T: There he addressed the bhikkhus thus:
mn7:1.4 | S: “Mendicants!” | T: “Bhikkhus.”—
mn7:1.5 | S: “Venerable sir,” they replied. | T: “Venerable sir,” they replied.
mn7:1.6 | S: The Buddha said this: | T: The Blessed One said this:
mn7:2.1 | S: “Suppose, mendicants, there was a cloth that was dirty and soiled. | T: “Bhikkhus, suppose a cloth were defiled and stained,
mn7:2.2 | S: No matter what dye the dyer applied—whether blue or yellow or red or magenta—it would look poorly dyed and impure in color. | T: and a dyer dipped it in some dye or other, whether blue or yellow or red or carmine; it would look poorly dyed and impure in colour.
mn7:2.3 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn7:2.4 | S: Because of the impurity of the cloth. | T: Because of the impurity of the cloth.
mn7:2.5 | S: In the same way, when the mind is corrupt, a bad destiny is to be expected. | T: So too, when the mind is defiled, an unhappy destination may be expected.
mn7:2.6 | S: Suppose there was a cloth that was pure and clean. | T: Bhikkhus, suppose a cloth were pure and bright,
mn7:2.7 | S: No matter what dye the dyer applied—whether blue or yellow or red or magenta—it would look well dyed and pure in color. | T: and a dyer dipped it in some dye or other, whether blue or yellow or red or carmine; it would look well dyed and pure in colour.
mn7:2.8 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn7:2.9 | S: Because of the purity of the cloth. | T: Because of the purity of the cloth.
mn7:2.10 | S: In the same way, when the mind isn’t corrupt, a good destiny is to be expected. | T: So too, when the mind is undefiled, a happy destination may be expected.
mn7:3.1 | S: And what are the corruptions of the mind? | T: “What, bhikkhus, are the imperfections that defile the mind?
mn7:3.2 | S: Covetousness and immoral greed, ill will, anger, acrimony, disdain, contempt, jealousy, stinginess, deceit, deviousness, obstinacy, aggression, conceit, arrogance, vanity, and negligence are corruptions of the mind. | T: Covetousness and unrighteous greed is an imperfection that defiles the mind. Ill will…anger…resentment…contempt… insolence…envy…avarice…deceit…fraud…obstinacy… rivalry…conceit…arrogance…vanity… …negligence is an imperfection that defiles the mind.
mn7:4.1 | S: A mendicant who understands that covetousness and immoral greed are corruptions of the mind gives them up. | T: “Knowing that covetousness and unrighteous greed is an imperfection that defiles the mind, a bhikkhu abandons it.
mn7:4.2 | S: A mendicant who understands that ill will … | T: Knowing that ill will…negligence is an imperfection that defiles the mind, a bhikkhu abandons it.
mn7:4.3 | P: iti viditvā byāpādaṁ cittassa upakkilesaṁ pajahati; | T: (none)
mn7:4.4 | P: ‘kodho cittassa upakkileso’ti— | T: (none)
mn7:4.5 | P: iti viditvā kodhaṁ cittassa upakkilesaṁ pajahati; | T: (none)
mn7:4.6 | P: ‘upanāho cittassa upakkileso’ti— | T: (none)
mn7:4.7 | P: iti viditvā upanāhaṁ cittassa upakkilesaṁ pajahati; | T: (none)
mn7:4.8 | P: ‘makkho cittassa upakkileso’ti— | T: (none)
mn7:4.9 | P: iti viditvā makkhaṁ cittassa upakkilesaṁ pajahati; | T: (none)
mn7:4.10 | P: ‘paḷāso cittassa upakkileso’ti— | T: (none)
mn7:4.11 | P: iti viditvā paḷāsaṁ cittassa upakkilesaṁ pajahati; | T: (none)
mn7:4.12 | P: ‘issā cittassa upakkileso’ti— | T: (none)
mn7:4.13 | P: iti viditvā issaṁ cittassa upakkilesaṁ pajahati; | T: (none)
mn7:4.14 | P: ‘macchariyaṁ cittassa upakkileso’ti— | T: (none)
mn7:4.15 | P: iti viditvā macchariyaṁ cittassa upakkilesaṁ pajahati; | T: (none)
mn7:4.16 | P: ‘māyā cittassa upakkileso’ti— | T: (none)
mn7:4.17 | P: iti viditvā māyaṁ cittassa upakkilesaṁ pajahati; | T: (none)
mn7:4.18 | P: ‘sāṭheyyaṁ cittassa upakkileso’ti— | T: (none)
mn7:4.19 | P: iti viditvā sāṭheyyaṁ cittassa upakkilesaṁ pajahati; | T: (none)
mn7:4.20 | P: ‘thambho cittassa upakkileso’ti— | T: (none)
mn7:4.21 | P: iti viditvā thambhaṁ cittassa upakkilesaṁ pajahati; | T: (none)
mn7:4.22 | P: ‘sārambho cittassa upakkileso’ti— | T: (none)
mn7:4.23 | P: iti viditvā sārambhaṁ cittassa upakkilesaṁ pajahati; | T: (none)
mn7:4.24 | P: ‘māno cittassa upakkileso’ti— | T: (none)
mn7:4.25 | P: iti viditvā mānaṁ cittassa upakkilesaṁ pajahati; | T: (none)
mn7:4.26 | P: ‘atimāno cittassa upakkileso’ti— | T: (none)
mn7:4.27 | P: iti viditvā atimānaṁ cittassa upakkilesaṁ pajahati; | T: (none)
mn7:4.28 | P: ‘mado cittassa upakkileso’ti— | T: (none)
mn7:4.29 | P: iti viditvā madaṁ cittassa upakkilesaṁ pajahati; | T: (none)
mn7:4.30 | S: negligence is a corruption of the mind gives it up. | T: (none)
mn7:4.31 | P: iti viditvā pamādaṁ cittassa upakkilesaṁ pajahati. | T: (none)
mn7:5.1 | S: When they have understood these corruptions of the mind | T: “When a bhikkhu has known that covetousness and unrighteous greed is an imperfection that defiles the mind and has abandoned it;
mn7:5.2 | S: for what they are, and have given them up, | T: when a bhikkhu has known that ill will…negligence is an imperfection that defiles the mind and has abandoned it,
mn7:5.3 | P: iti viditvā byāpādo cittassa upakkileso pahīno hoti; | T: (none)
mn7:5.4 | P: ‘kodho cittassa upakkileso’ti— | T: (none)
mn7:5.5 | P: iti viditvā kodho cittassa upakkileso pahīno hoti; | T: (none)
mn7:5.6 | P: ‘upanāho cittassa upakkileso’ti— | T: (none)
mn7:5.7 | P: iti viditvā upanāho cittassa upakkileso pahīno hoti; | T: (none)
mn7:5.8 | P: ‘makkho cittassa upakkileso’ti— | T: (none)
mn7:5.9 | P: iti viditvā makkho cittassa upakkileso pahīno hoti; | T: (none)
mn7:5.10 | P: ‘paḷāso cittassa upakkileso’ti— | T: (none)
mn7:5.11 | P: iti viditvā paḷāso cittassa upakkileso pahīno hoti; | T: (none)
mn7:5.12 | P: ‘issā cittassa upakkileso’ti— | T: (none)
mn7:5.13 | P: iti viditvā issā cittassa upakkileso pahīno hoti; | T: (none)
mn7:5.14 | P: ‘macchariyaṁ cittassa upakkileso’ti— | T: (none)
mn7:5.15 | P: iti viditvā macchariyaṁ cittassa upakkileso pahīno hoti; | T: (none)
mn7:5.16 | P: ‘māyā cittassa upakkileso’ti— | T: (none)
mn7:5.17 | P: iti viditvā māyā cittassa upakkileso pahīno hoti; | T: (none)
mn7:5.18 | P: ‘sāṭheyyaṁ cittassa upakkileso’ti— | T: (none)
mn7:5.19 | P: iti viditvā sāṭheyyaṁ cittassa upakkileso pahīno hoti; | T: (none)
mn7:5.20 | P: ‘thambho cittassa upakkileso’ti— | T: (none)
mn7:5.21 | P: iti viditvā thambho cittassa upakkileso pahīno hoti; | T: (none)
mn7:5.22 | P: ‘sārambho cittassa upakkileso’ti— | T: (none)
mn7:5.23 | P: iti viditvā sārambho cittassa upakkileso pahīno hoti; | T: (none)
mn7:5.24 | P: ‘māno cittassa upakkileso’ti— | T: (none)
mn7:5.25 | P: iti viditvā māno cittassa upakkileso pahīno hoti; | T: (none)
mn7:5.26 | P: ‘atimāno cittassa upakkileso’ti— | T: (none)
mn7:5.27 | P: iti viditvā atimāno cittassa upakkileso pahīno hoti; | T: (none)
mn7:5.28 | P: ‘mado cittassa upakkileso’ti— | T: (none)
mn7:5.29 | P: iti viditvā mado cittassa upakkileso pahīno hoti; | T: (none)
mn7:5.30 | P: ‘pamādo cittassa upakkileso’ti— | T: (none)
mn7:5.31 | P: iti viditvā pamādo cittassa upakkileso pahīno hoti. | T: (none)
mn7:5.32 | S: they have experiential confidence in the Buddha: | T: he acquires unwavering confidence in the Buddha thus:
mn7:5.33 | S: ‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ | T: ‘The Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened, blessed.’
mn7:6.1 | S: They have experiential confidence in the teaching: | T: “He acquires unwavering confidence in the Dhamma thus:
mn7:6.2 | S: ‘The teaching is well explained by the Buddha—apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.’ | T: ‘The Dhamma is well proclaimed by the Blessed One, visible here and now, immediately effective, inviting inspection, onward leading, to be experienced by the wise for themselves.’
mn7:7.1 | S: They have experiential confidence in the Saṅgha: | T: “He acquires unwavering confidence in the Sangha thus:
mn7:7.2 | S: ‘The Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples is practicing the way that’s good, direct, systematic, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight individual persons. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with cupped palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.’ | T: ‘The Sangha of the Blessed One’s disciples is practising the good way, practising the straight way, practising the true way, practising the proper way, that is, the four pairs of persons, the eight types of individuals; this Sangha of the Blessed One’s disciples is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, the unsurpassed field of merit for the world.’
mn7:8.1 | S: When a mendicant has discarded, eliminated, released, given up, and relinquished to this extent, thinking, ‘I have experiential confidence in the Buddha … | T: “When he has given up, expelled, released, abandoned, and relinquished the imperfections of the mind in part, he considers thus: ‘I am possessed of unwavering confidence in the Buddha,’
mn7:8.2 | P: Pamuditassa pīti jāyati, pītimanassa kāyo passambhati, passaddhakāyo sukhaṁ vedeti, sukhino cittaṁ samādhiyati; | T: (none)
mn7:9.1 | S: the teaching … | T: (none)
mn7:10.1 | S: the Saṅgha,’ they find inspiration in the meaning and the teaching, and find joy connected with the teaching. | T: and he gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in the Dhamma, gains gladness connected with the Dhamma.
mn7:10.2 | P: pamuditassa pīti jāyati, pītimanassa kāyo passambhati, passaddhakāyo sukhaṁ vedeti, sukhino cittaṁ samādhiyati. | T: When he is glad, rapture is born in him; in one who is rapturous, the body becomes tranquil; one whose body is tranquil feels pleasure; in one who feels pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated.
mn7:11.1 | S: Thinking: ‘I have discarded, eliminated, released, given up, and relinquished to this extent,’ they find inspiration in the meaning and the teaching, and find joy connected with the teaching. | T: “He considers thus: ‘I am possessed of unwavering confidence in the Dhamma,’ and he gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in the Dhamma, gains gladness connected with the Dhamma. When he is glad…the mind becomes concentrated. “He considers thus: ‘I am possessed of unwavering confidence in the Sangha,’ and he gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in the Dhamma, gains gladness connected with the Dhamma. When he is glad…the mind becomes concentrated. “He considers thus: ‘The imperfections of the mind have in part been given up, expelled, released, abandoned, and relinquished by me,’ and he gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in the Dhamma, gains gladness connected with the Dhamma.
mn7:11.2 | S: When they’re joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, they feel bliss. And when they’re blissful, the mind becomes immersed in samādhi. | T: When he is glad, rapture is born in him; in one who is rapturous, the body becomes tranquil; one whose body is tranquil feels pleasure; in one who feels pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated.
mn7:12.1 | S: When a mendicant of such ethics, such qualities, and such wisdom eats boiled fine rice with the dark grains picked out and served with many soups and sauces, that is no obstacle for them. | T: “Bhikkhus, if a bhikkhu of such virtue, such a state of concentration, and such wisdom eats almsfood consisting of choice hill rice along with various sauces and curries, even that will be no obstacle for him.
mn7:12.2 | S: Compare with cloth that is dirty and soiled; it can be made pure and clean by pure water. Or native gold, which can be made pure and bright by a forge. | T: Just as a cloth that is defiled and stained becomes pure and bright with the help of clear water, or just as gold becomes pure and bright with the help of a furnace,
mn7:12.3 | S: In the same way, when a mendicant of such ethics, such qualities, and such wisdom eats boiled fine rice with the dark grains picked out and served with many soups and sauces, that is no obstacle for them. | T: so too, if a bhikkhu of such virtue…eats almsfood…that will be no obstacle for him.
mn7:13.1 | S: They meditate spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of love to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. | T: “He abides pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, likewise the second, likewise the third, likewise the fourth; so above, below, around, and everywhere, and to all as to himself, he abides pervading the all-encompassing world with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility and without ill will.
mn7:14.1 | S: They meditate spreading a heart full of compassion to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of compassion to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. | T: “He abides pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with compassion…with a mind imbued with altruistic joy…with a mind imbued with equanimity,
mn7:15.1 | S: They meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of rejoicing to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. | T: (none)
mn7:16.1 | S: They meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. | T: likewise the second, likewise the third, likewise the fourth; so above, below, around, and everywhere, and to all as to himself, he abides pervading the all-encompassing world with a mind imbued with equanimity, abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility and without ill will.
mn7:17.1 | S: They understand: ‘There is this, there is what is worse than this, there is what is better than this, and there is an escape beyond the scope of perception.’ | T: “He understands thus: ‘There is this, there is the inferior, there is the superior, and beyond there is an escape from this whole field of perception.’
mn7:18.1 | S: Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. | T: “When he knows and sees thus, his mind is liberated from the taint of sensual desire, from the taint of being, and from the taint of ignorance.
mn7:18.2 | S: When they’re freed, they know they’re freed. | T: When it is liberated there comes the knowledge: ‘It is liberated.’
mn7:18.3 | S: They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’ | T: He understands: ‘Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.’
mn7:18.4 | S: This is called | T: Bhikkhus, this bhikkhu is called one bathed with the inner bathing.”
mn7:18.5 | S: a mendicant who is bathed with the inner bathing.” | T: (none)
mn7:19.1 | S: Now at that time the brahmin Bhāradvāja of Sundarikā was sitting not far from the Buddha. | T: Now on that occasion the brahmin Sundarika Bhāradvāja was sitting not far from the Blessed One.
mn7:19.2 | S: He said to the Buddha, | T: Then he said to the Blessed One:
mn7:19.3 | S: “But does Worthy Gotama go to the Bāhukā River to bathe?” | T: “But does Master Gotama go to the Bāhukā River to bathe?”
mn7:19.4 | S: “Brahmin, why go to the Bāhukā River? | T: “Why, brahmin, go to the Bāhukā River?
mn7:19.5 | S: What can the Bāhukā River do?” | T: What can the Bāhukā River do?”
mn7:19.6 | S: “Many people deem that the Bāhukā River leads to a heavenly world and bestows merit. And many people rinse off their bad deeds in the Bāhukā River.” | T: “Master Gotama, the Bāhukā River is held by many to give liberation, it is held by many to give merit, and many wash away their evil actions in the Bāhukā River.”
mn7:20.1 | S: Then the Buddha addressed Bhāradvāja of Sundarikā in verse: | T: Then the Blessed One addressed the brahmin Sundarika Bhāradvāja in stanzas:
mn7:20.2 | S: “The Bāhukā and the Adhikakkā, | T: “Bāhukā and Adhikakkā,
mn7:20.3 | S: at Gayā and the Sundarikā too, | T: Gayā and Sundarikā too,
mn7:20.4 | S: Sarasvatī and Payāga, | T: Payāga and Sarassatī,
mn7:20.5 | S: and the Bāhumatī River: | T: And the stream Bahumatī—
mn7:20.6 | S: a fool can constantly plunge into them | T: A fool may there forever bathe
mn7:20.7 | S: but it won’t purify their dark deeds. | T: Yet will not purify dark deeds.
mn7:20.8 | S: What can the Sundarikā do? | T: What can the Sundarikā bring to pass?
mn7:20.9 | S: What the Payāga or the Bāhukā? | T: What the Payāga? What the Bāhukā?
mn7:20.10 | S: They can’t cleanse a cruel person, a sinner | T: They cannot purify an evil-doer, A man who has done cruel and brutal deeds.
mn7:20.11 | S: from their bad deeds. | T: (none)
mn7:20.12 | S: For the pure in heart it’s always | T: One pure in heart has evermore
mn7:20.13 | S: the spring festival or the sabbath. | T: The Feast of Spring, the Holy Day;
mn7:20.14 | S: For the pure in heart and clean of deed, | T: One fair in act, one pure in heart
mn7:20.15 | S: their vows will always be fulfilled. | T: Brings his virtue to perfection.
mn7:20.16 | S: It’s here alone that you should bathe, brahmin, | T: It is here, brahmin, that you should bathe,
mn7:20.17 | S: making yourself a sanctuary for all creatures. | T: To make yourself a refuge for all beings.
mn7:20.18 | S: And if you speak no lies, | T: And if you speak no falsehood
mn7:20.19 | S: nor harm any living creature, | T: Nor work harm for living beings,
mn7:20.20 | S: nor steal anything not given, | T: Nor take what is offered not,
mn7:20.21 | S: and you’re faithful and not stingy: | T: With faith and free from avarice,
mn7:20.22 | S: what’s the point of going to Gayā? | T: What need for you to go to Gayā?
mn7:20.23 | S: For any well may be your Gayā!” | T: For any well will be your Gayā.”
mn7:21.1 | S: When he had spoken, the brahmin Bhāradvāja of Sundarikā said to the Buddha, | T: When this was said, the brahmin Sundarika Bhāradvāja said:
mn7:21.2 | S: “Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! | T: “Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent, Master Gotama!
mn7:21.3 | S: As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, worthy Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. | T: Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with eyesight to see forms.
mn7:21.4 | S: I go for refuge to the worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. | T: I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
mn7:21.5 | S: May I receive the going forth, the ordination in the worthy Gotama’s presence?” | T: I would receive the going forth under Master Gotama, I would receive the full admission.”
mn7:22.1 | S: And the brahmin Bhāradvāja of Sundarikā received the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha’s presence. | T: And the brahmin Sundarika Bhāradvāja received the going forth under the Blessed One, and he received the full admission.
mn7:22.2 | S: Not long after his ordination, Venerable Bhāradvāja, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness. | T: And soon, not long after his full admission, dwelling alone, withdrawn, diligent, ardent, and resolute, the venerable Bhāradvāja, by realising for himself with direct knowledge, here and now entered upon and abided in that supreme goal of the holy life for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from the home life into homelessness.
mn7:22.3 | S: He understood: “Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further for this place.” | T: He directly knew: “Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.”
mn7:22.4 | S: And Venerable Bhāradvāja became one of the perfected. | T: And the venerable Bhāradvāja became one of the arahants.
mn7:22.5 | P: Vatthasuttaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ sattamaṁ. | T: (none)

