## mn28
mn28:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
mn28:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
mn28:1.3 | S: There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants, | T: There the venerable Sāriputta addressed the bhikkhus thus:
mn28:1.4 | S: “Reverends, mendicants!” | T: “Friends, bhikkhus.”—
mn28:1.5 | S: “Reverend,” they replied. | T: “Friend,” they replied.
mn28:1.6 | S: Sāriputta said this: | T: The venerable Sāriputta said this:
mn28:2.1 | S: “The footprints of all creatures that walk can fit inside an elephant’s footprint, so an elephant’s footprint is said to be the biggest of them all. | T: “Friends, just as the footprint of any living being that walks can be placed within an elephant’s footprint, and so the elephant’s footprint is declared the chief of them because of its great size;
mn28:2.2 | S: In the same way, all skillful qualities are included in the four noble truths. | T: so too, all wholesome states can be included in the Four Noble Truths.
mn28:2.3 | S: What four? | T: In what four?
mn28:2.4 | S: The noble truths of suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. | T: In the noble truth of suffering, in the noble truth of the origin of suffering, in the noble truth of the cessation of suffering, and in the noble truth of the way leading to the cessation of suffering.
mn28:3.1 | S: And what is the noble truth of suffering? | T: “And what is the noble truth of suffering?
mn28:3.2 | S: Rebirth is suffering; old age is suffering; death is suffering; sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are suffering; not getting what you wish for is suffering. In brief, the five grasping aggregates are suffering. | T: Birth is suffering, ageing is suffering, death is suffering; sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair are suffering; not to obtain what one wants is suffering; in short, the five aggregates affected by clinging are suffering.
mn28:3.3 | S: And what are the five grasping aggregates? | T: “And what are the five aggregates affected by clinging?
mn28:3.4 | S: They are as follows: the grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. | T: They are: the material form aggregate affected by clinging, the feeling aggregate affected by clinging, the perception aggregate affected by clinging, the formations aggregate affected by clinging, and the consciousness aggregate affected by clinging.
mn28:4.1 | S: And what is the grasping aggregate of form? | T: “And what is the material form aggregate affected by clinging?
mn28:4.2 | S: The four principal states, and form derived from the four principal states. | T: It is the four great elements and the material form derived from the four great elements.
mn28:5.1 | S: And what are the four principal states? | T: And what are the four great elements?
mn28:5.2 | S: The elements of earth, water, fire, and air. | T: They are the earth element, the water element, the fire element, and the air element.
mn28:6.1 | S: And what is the earth element? | T: The Earth Element “What, friends, is the earth element?
mn28:6.2 | S: The earth element may be interior or exterior. | T: The earth element may be either internal or external.
mn28:6.3 | S: And what is the interior earth element? | T: What is the internal earth element?
mn28:6.4 | S: Anything internal, personal, that’s hard, solid, and appropriated. This includes: | T: Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is solid, solidified, and clung-to; that is,
mn28:6.5 | S: head hair, body hair, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, undigested food, feces; or anything else internal, personal, that’s hard, solid, and appropriated. | T: head-hairs, body-hairs, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone-marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, contents of the stomach, feces, or whatever else internally, belonging to oneself, is solid, solidified, and clung-to:
mn28:6.6 | S: This is called the interior earth element. | T: this is called the internal earth element.
mn28:6.7 | S: The interior earth element and the exterior earth element are just the earth element. | T: Now both the internal earth element and the external earth element are simply earth element.
mn28:6.8 | S: This should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ | T: And that should be seen as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’
mn28:6.9 | S: When you truly see with right understanding, you grow disillusioned with the earth element, detaching the mind from the earth element. | T: When one sees it thus as it actually is with proper wisdom, one becomes disenchanted with the earth element and makes the mind dispassionate toward the earth element.
mn28:7.1 | S: There comes a time when the exterior water element flares up. | T: “Now there comes a time when the water element is disturbed
mn28:7.2 | S: At that time the exterior earth element vanishes. | T: and then the external earth element vanishes.
mn28:7.3 | S: So for all its great age, the earth element will be revealed as impermanent, liable to end, vanish, and perish. | T: When even this external earth element, great as it is, is seen to be impermanent, subject to destruction, disappearance, and changeˌ
mn28:7.4 | S: What then of this ephemeral body appropriated by craving? Rather than ‘I’ or ‘mine’ or ‘I am’, they consider it to be none of these things. | T: what of this body, which is clung to by craving and lasts but a while? There can be no considering that as ‘I’ or ‘mine’ or ‘I am.’
mn28:8.1 | S: If others abuse, attack, harass, and trouble that mendicant, they understand: | T: “So then, if others abuse, revile, scold, and harass a bhikkhu who has seen this element as it actually is, he understands thus:
mn28:8.2 | S: ‘This painful feeling born of ear contact has arisen in me. | T: ‘This painful feeling born of ear-contact has arisen in me.
mn28:8.3 | S: That’s dependent, not independent. | T: That is dependent, not independent.
mn28:8.4 | S: Dependent on what? | T: Dependent on what?
mn28:8.5 | S: Dependent on contact.’ | T: Dependent on contact.’
mn28:8.6 | S: They see that contact, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness are impermanent. | T: Then he sees that contact is impermanent, that feeling is impermanent, that perception is impermanent, that formations are impermanent, and that consciousness is impermanent.
mn28:8.7 | S: Based on that element alone, their mind leaps forth, gains confidence, settles down, and becomes decided. | T: And his mind, having made an element its objective support, enters into that new objective support and acquires confidence, steadiness, and resolution.
mn28:9.1 | S: Others might treat that mendicant with disliking, loathing, and detestation, | T: “Now, if others attack that bhikkhu in ways that are unwished for, undesired, and disagreeable,
mn28:9.2 | S: striking them with fists, stones, sticks, and swords. | T: by contact with fists, clods, sticks, or knives,
mn28:9.3 | S: They understand: | T: he understands thus:
mn28:9.4 | S: ‘This body is such that fists, stones, sticks, and swords strike it. | T: ‘This body is of such a nature that contact with fists, clods, sticks, and knives assail it.
mn28:9.5 | S: But the Buddha has said in the Advice on the Simile of the Saw: | T: But this has been said by the Blessed One in his “advice on the simile of the saw”:
mn28:9.6 | S: “Even if low-down bandits were to sever you limb from limb with a two-handed saw, anyone who had a malevolent thought on that account would not be following my instructions.” | T: “Bhikkhus, even if bandits were to sever you savagely limb by limb with a two-handled saw, he who gave rise to a mind of hate towards them would not be carrying out my teaching.”
mn28:9.7 | S: My energy shall be roused up and unflagging, my mindfulness established and lucid, my body tranquil and undisturbed, and my mind immersed and unified in samādhi. | T: So tireless energy shall be aroused in me and unremitting mindfulness established, my body shall be tranquil and untroubled, my mind concentrated and unified.
mn28:9.8 | S: Gladly now, let fists, stones, sticks, and swords strike this body! For this is how the instructions of the Buddhas are followed.’ | T: And now let contact with fists, clods, sticks, and knives assail this body; for this teaching of the Buddhas is being practised by me.’
mn28:10.1 | S: While recollecting the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha in this way, equanimity based on the skillful may not become stabilized in them. | T: “When that bhikkhu thus recollects the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha, if equanimity supported by the wholesome does not become established in him,
mn28:10.2 | S: In that case they stir up a sense of urgency: | T: then he arouses a sense of urgency thus:
mn28:10.3 | S: ‘It’s my loss, my misfortune, | T: ‘It is a loss for me, it is no gain for me, it is bad for me, it is no good for me,
mn28:10.4 | S: that while recollecting the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha in this way, equanimity based on the skillful does not become stabilized in me.’ | T: that when I thus recollect the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha, equanimity supported by the wholesome does not become established in me.’
mn28:10.5 | S: They’re like a daughter-in-law who stirs up a sense of urgency when they see their father-in-law. | T: Just as when a daughter-in-law sees her father-in-law, she arouses a sense of urgency to please him, so too, when that bhikkhu thus recollects the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha, if equanimity supported by the wholesome does not become established in him, then he arouses a sense of urgency.
mn28:10.8 | S: But if, while recollecting the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha in this way, equanimity based on the skillful does become stabilized in them, they’re happy with that. | T: But if, when he recollects the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha, equanimity supported by the wholesome becomes established in him, then he is satisfied with it.
mn28:10.9 | S: At this point, much has been done by that mendicant. | T: At that point, friends, much has been done by that bhikkhu.
mn28:11.1 | S: And what is the water element? | T: The Water Element “What, friends, is the water element?
mn28:11.2 | S: The water element may be interior or exterior. | T: The water element may be either internal or external.
mn28:11.3 | S: And what is the interior water element? | T: What is the internal water element?
mn28:11.4 | S: Anything internal, personal, that’s water, watery, and appropriated. This includes: | T: Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is water, watery, and clung-to; that is,
mn28:11.5 | S: bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, saliva, snot, synovial fluid, urine; or anything else internal, personal, that’s water, watery, and appropriated. | T: bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, spittle, snot, oil-of-the-joints, urine, or whatever else internally, belonging to oneself, is water, watery, and clung-to:
mn28:11.6 | S: This is called the interior water element. | T: this is called the internal water element.
mn28:11.7 | S: The interior water element and the exterior water element are just the water element. | T: Now both the internal water element and the external water element are simply water element.
mn28:11.8 | S: This should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ | T: And that should be seen as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’
mn28:11.9 | S: When you truly see with right understanding, you grow disillusioned with the water element, detaching the mind from the water element. | T: When one sees it thus as it actually is with proper wisdom, one becomes disenchanted with the water element and makes the mind dispassionate toward the water element.
mn28:12.1 | S: There comes a time when the exterior water element flares up. | T: “Now there comes a time when the external water element is disturbed.
mn28:12.2 | S: It sweeps away villages, towns, cities, countries, and regions. | T: It carries away villages, towns, cities, districts, and countries.
mn28:12.3 | S: There comes a time when the water in the ocean sinks down a hundred leagues, or two, three, four, five, six, up to seven hundred leagues. | T: There comes a time when the waters in the great ocean sink down a hundred leagues, two hundred leagues, three hundred leagues, four hundred leagues, five hundred leagues, six hundred leagues, seven hundred leagues.
mn28:12.4 | S: There comes a time when the water in the ocean stands just seven palm trees deep, or six, five, four, three, two, or even just one palm tree deep. | T: There comes a time when the waters in the great ocean stand seven palms deep, six palms deep…two palms deep, only a palm deep.
mn28:12.5 | S: There comes a time when the water in the ocean stands just seven fathoms deep, or six, five, four, three, two, or even just one fathom deep. | T: There comes a time when the waters in the great ocean stand seven fathoms deep, six fathoms deep…two fathoms deep, only a fathom deep.
mn28:12.6 | S: There comes a time when the water in the ocean stands just half a fathom deep, or waist deep, or knee deep, or even just ankle deep. | T: There comes a time when the waters in the great ocean stand half a fathom deep, only waist deep, only knee deep, only ankle deep.
mn28:12.7 | S: There comes a time when there’s not even enough water left in the great ocean to wet the tip of the toe. | T: There comes a time when the waters in the great ocean are not enough to wet even the joint of a finger.
mn28:12.8 | S: So for all its great age, the water element will be revealed as impermanent, liable to end, vanish, and perish. | T: When even this external water element, great as it is, is seen to be impermanent, subject to destruction, disappearance, and change,
mn28:13.1 | S: What then of this ephemeral body appropriated by craving? Rather than ‘I’ or ‘mine’ or ‘I am’, they consider it to be none of these things. … | T: what of this body, which is clung to by craving and lasts but a while? There can be no considering that as ‘I’ or ‘mine’ or ‘I am.’
mn28:14.1 | S: If, while recollecting the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha in this way, equanimity based on the skillful does become stabilized in them, they’re happy with that. | T: “So then, if others abuse, revile, scold, and harass a bhikkhu who has seen this element as it actually is, he understands thus:…repeat §§8—
mn28:15.1 | S: At this point, much has been done by that mendicant. | T: 10…At that point too, friends, much has been done by that bhikkhu.
mn28:16.1 | S: And what is the fire element? | T: The Fire Element “What, friends, is the fire element?
mn28:16.2 | S: The fire element may be interior or exterior. | T: The fire element may be either internal or external.
mn28:16.3 | S: And what is the interior fire element? | T: What is the internal fire element?
mn28:16.4 | S: Anything internal, pertaining to an individual that’s fire, fiery, and appropriated. This includes: | T: Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is fire, fiery, and clung-to; that is,
mn28:16.5 | S: that which warms, that which ages, that which heats you up when feverish, that which properly digests food and drink; or anything else internal, personal, that’s fire, fiery, and appropriated. | T: that by which one is warmed, ages, and is consumed, and that by which what is eaten, drunk, consumed, and tasted gets completely digested, or whatever else internally, belonging to oneself, is fire, fiery, and clung-to:
mn28:16.6 | S: This is called the interior fire element. | T: this is called the internal fire element.
mn28:16.7 | S: The interior fire element and the exterior fire element are just the fire element. | T: Now both the internal fire element and the external fire element are simply fire element.
mn28:16.8 | S: This should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ | T: And that should be seen as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’
mn28:16.9 | S: When you truly see with right understanding, you grow disillusioned with the fire element, detaching the mind from the fire element. | T: When one sees it thus as it actually is with proper wisdom, one becomes disenchanted with the fire element and makes the mind dispassionate toward the fire element.
mn28:17.1 | S: There comes a time when the exterior fire element flares up. | T: “Now there comes a time when the external fire element is disturbed.
mn28:17.2 | S: It burns up villages, towns, cities, countries, and regions until | T: It burns up villages, towns, cities, districts, and countries.
mn28:17.3 | S: it reaches a green field, a roadside, a cliff’s edge, a body of water, or cleared parkland, where it’s extinguished due to not being fed. | T: It goes out due to lack of fuel only when it comes to green grass, or to a road, or to a rock, or to water, or to a fair open space.
mn28:17.4 | S: There comes a time when they go looking for a fire, taking just a chicken feather or a scrap of sinew as kindling. | T: There comes a time when they seek to make a fire even with a cock’s feather or a hide-paring.
mn28:17.5 | S: So for all its great age, the fire element will be revealed as impermanent, liable to end, vanish, and perish. | T: When even this external fire element, great as it is, is seen to be impermanent, subject to destruction, disappearance, and change,
mn28:17.6 | S: What then of this ephemeral body appropriated by craving? Rather than ‘I’ or ‘mine’ or ‘I am’, they consider it to be none of these things. … | T: what of this body, which is clung to by craving and lasts but a while? There can be no considering that as ‘I’ or ‘mine’ or ‘I am.’
mn28:18-20.1 | S: If, while recollecting the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha in this way, equanimity based on the skillful does become stabilized in them, they’re happy with that. | T: “So then, if others abuse, revile, scold, and harass a bhikkhu who has seen this element as it actually is, he understands thus:…repeat §§8—
mn28:18-20.2 | S: At this point, much has been done by that mendicant. | T: 10…At that point too, friends, much has been done by that bhikkhu.
mn28:21.1 | S: And what is the air element? | T: The Air Element “What, friends, is the air element?
mn28:21.2 | S: The air element may be interior or exterior. | T: The air element may be either internal or external.
mn28:21.3 | S: And what is the interior air element? | T: What is the internal air element?
mn28:21.4 | S: Anything internal, personal, that’s air, airy, and appropriated. This includes: | T: Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is air, airy, and clung-to; that is,
mn28:21.5 | S: winds that go up or down, winds in the belly or the bowels, winds that flow through the limbs, in-breaths and out-breaths; or anything else internal, personal, that’s air, airy, and appropriated. | T: up-going winds, down-going winds, winds in the belly, winds in the bowels, winds that course through the limbs, in-breath and out-breath, or whatever else internally, belonging to oneself, is air, airy, and clung-to:
mn28:21.6 | S: This is called the interior air element. | T: this is called the internal air element.
mn28:21.7 | S: The interior air element and the exterior air element are just the air element. | T: Now both the internal air element and the external air element are simply air element.
mn28:21.8 | S: This should be truly seen with right understanding like this: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ | T: And that should be seen as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’
mn28:21.9 | S: When you truly see with right understanding, you grow disillusioned with the air element, detaching the mind from the air element. | T: When one sees it thus as it actually is with proper wisdom, one becomes disenchanted with the air element and makes the mind dispassionate toward the air element.
mn28:22.1 | S: There comes a time when the exterior air element flares up. | T: “Now there comes a time when the external air element is disturbed.
mn28:22.2 | S: It sweeps away villages, towns, cities, countries, and regions. | T: It sweeps away villages, towns, cities, districts, and countries.
mn28:22.3 | S: There comes a time, in the last month of summer, when they look for wind by using a palm-leaf or fan, and even the grasses in the drip-fringe of a thatch roof don’t stir. | T: There comes a time in the last month of the hot season when they seek wind by means of a fan or bellows and even the strands of straw in the drip-fringe of the thatch do not stir.
mn28:22.4 | S: So for all its great age, the air element will be revealed as impermanent, liable to end, vanish, and perish. | T: When even this external air element, great as it is, is seen to be impermanent, subject to destruction, disappearance, and change,
mn28:22.5 | S: What then of this ephemeral body appropriated by craving? Rather than ‘I’ or ‘mine’ or ‘I am’, they consider it to be none of these things. | T: what of this body, which is clung to by craving and lasts but a while? There can be no considering that as ‘I’ or ‘mine’ or ‘I am.’
mn28:23.1 | S: If others abuse, attack, harass, and trouble that mendicant, they understand: | T: “So then, if others abuse, revile, scold, and harass a bhikkhu who has seen this element as it actually is, he understands thus:… repeat §§8—
mn28:23.2 | S: ‘This painful feeling born of ear contact has arisen in me. | T: (none)
mn28:23.3 | S: That’s dependent, not independent. | T: (none)
mn28:23.4 | S: Dependent on what? | T: (none)
mn28:23.5 | S: Dependent on contact.’ | T: (none)
mn28:23.6 | S: They see that contact, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness are impermanent. | T: (none)
mn28:23.7 | S: Based on that element alone, their mind leaps forth, gains confidence, settles down, and becomes decided. | T: (none)
mn28:24.1 | S: Others might treat that mendicant with disliking, loathing, and detestation, striking them with fists, stones, sticks, and swords. | T: (none)
mn28:24.2 | S: They understand: ‘This body is such that fists, stones, sticks, and swords strike it. | T: (none)
mn28:24.3 | S: But the Buddha has said in the Advice on the Simile of the Saw: “Even if low-down bandits were to sever you limb from limb with a two-handed saw, anyone who had a thought of hate on that account would not be following my instructions.” | T: (none)
mn28:24.4 | S: My energy shall be roused up and unflagging, my mindfulness established and lucid, my body tranquil and undisturbed, and my mind immersed and unified in samādhi. | T: (none)
mn28:24.5 | S: Gladly now, let fists, stones, sticks, and swords strike this body! For this is how the instructions of the Buddhas are followed.’ | T: (none)
mn28:25.1 | S: While recollecting the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha in this way, equanimity based on the skillful may not become stabilized in them. | T: (none)
mn28:25.2 | S: In that case they stir up a sense of urgency: | T: (none)
mn28:25.3 | S: ‘It’s my loss, my misfortune, | T: (none)
mn28:25.4 | S: that while recollecting the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha in this way, equanimity based on the skillful does not become stabilized in me.’ | T: (none)
mn28:25.5 | S: They’re like a daughter-in-law who stirs up a sense of urgency when they see their father-in-law. | T: (none)
mn28:25.10 | S: But if, while recollecting the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha in this way, equanimity based on the skillful does become stabilized in them, they’re happy with that. | T: (none)
mn28:25.11 | S: At this point, much has been done by that mendicant. | T: 10…At that point too, friends, much has been done by that bhikkhu.
mn28:26.1 | S: When a space is enclosed by sticks, creepers, grass, and mud it becomes known as a ‘building’. | T: “Friends, just as when a space is enclosed by timber and creepers, grass, and clay, it comes to be termed just ‘house,’
mn28:26.2 | S: In the same way, when a space is enclosed by bones, sinews, flesh, and skin it becomes known as a ‘form’. | T: so too, when a space is enclosed by bones and sinews, flesh and skin, it comes to be termed just ‘material form.’
mn28:27.1 | S: Reverends, though the interior eye is intact, so long as exterior sights don’t come into range and there’s no corresponding engagement, there’s no manifestation of the corresponding type of consciousness. | T: “If, friends, internally the eye is intact but no external forms come into its range, and there is no corresponding conscious engagement, then there is no manifestation of the corresponding section of consciousness.
mn28:27.2 | S: Though the interior eye is intact and exterior sights come into range, so long as there’s no corresponding engagement, there’s no manifestation of the corresponding type of consciousness. | T: If internally the eye is intact and external forms come into its range, but there is no corresponding conscious engagement, then there is no manifestation of the corresponding section of consciousness.
mn28:27.3 | S: But when the interior eye is intact and exterior sights come into range and there is corresponding engagement, there is the manifestation of the corresponding type of consciousness. | T: But when internally the eye is intact and external forms come into its range and there is the corresponding conscious engagement, then there is the manifestation of the corresponding section of consciousness.
mn28:28.1 | S: The form produced in this way is included in the grasping aggregate of form. The feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness produced in this way are each included in the corresponding grasping aggregate. | T: “The material form in what has thus come to be is included in the material form aggregate affected by clinging. The feeling in what has thus come to be is included in the feeling aggregate affected by clinging. The perception in what has thus come to be is included in the perception aggregate affected by clinging. The formations in what has thus come to be are included in the formations aggregate affected by clinging. The consciousness in what has thus come to be is included in the consciousness aggregate affected by clinging.
mn28:28.2 | S: They understand: | T: He understands thus:
mn28:28.3 | S: ‘So this is how there comes to be inclusion, gathering together, and assimilation into these five grasping aggregates. | T: ‘This, indeed, is how there comes to be the inclusion, gathering, and amassing of things into these five aggregates affected by clinging.
mn28:28.4 | S: But the Buddha has said: | T: Now this has been said by the Blessed One:
mn28:28.5 | S: “One who sees dependent origination sees the teaching. | T: “One who sees dependent origination sees the Dhamma;
mn28:28.6 | S: One who sees the teaching sees dependent origination.” | T: one who sees the Dhamma sees dependent origination.”
mn28:28.7 | S: And these five grasping aggregates are indeed dependently originated. | T: And these five aggregates affected by clinging are dependently arisen.
mn28:28.8 | S: The desire, clinging, attraction, and attachment for these five grasping aggregates is the origin of suffering. | T: The desire, indulgence, inclination, and holding based on these five aggregates affected by clinging is the origin of suffering.
mn28:28.9 | S: Giving up and getting rid of desire and greed for these five grasping aggregates is the cessation of suffering.’ | T: The removal of desire and lust, the abandonment of desire and lust for these five aggregates affected by clinging is the cessation of suffering.’
mn28:28.10 | S: At this point, much has been done by that mendicant. | T: At that point too, friends, much has been done by that bhikkhu.
mn28:29-30.1 | S: Though the ear … | T: “If, friends, internally the ear is intact but no external sounds come into its range…as in §§27—28…At that point too, friends, much has been done by that bhikkhu. “If, friends, internally the nose is intact but no external smells come into its range…At that point too, friends, much has been done by that bhikkhu. “If, friends, internally the tongue is intact but no external flavours come into its range…At that point too, friends, much has been done by that bhikkhu. “If, friends, internally the body is intact but no external tangibles come into its range…At that point too, friends, much has been done by that bhikkhu.
mn28:31-32.1 | S: nose … | T: (none)
mn28:33-34.1 | S: tongue … | T: (none)
mn28:35-36.1 | S: body … | T: (none)
mn28:37.1 | S: mind is intact internally, so long as exterior ideas don’t come into range and there’s no corresponding engagement, there’s no manifestation of the corresponding type of consciousness. | T: “If, friends, internally the mind is intact but no external mind-objects come into its range, and there is no corresponding conscious engagement, then there is no manifestation of the corresponding section of consciousness.
mn28:38.1 | S: Though the mind is intact internally and exterior ideas come into range, so long as there’s no corresponding engagement, there’s no manifestation of the corresponding type of consciousness. | T: If internally the mind is intact and external mind-objects come into its range, but there is no corresponding conscious engagement, then there is no manifestation of the corresponding section of consciousness.
mn28:38.2 | S: But when the mind is intact internally and exterior ideas come into range and there is corresponding engagement, there is the manifestation of the corresponding type of consciousness. | T: But when internally the mind is intact and external mind-objects come into its range and there is the corresponding conscious engagement, then there is the manifestation of the corresponding section of consciousness.
mn28:38.3 | S: The form produced in this way is included in the grasping aggregate of form. The feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness produced in this way are each included in the corresponding grasping aggregate. | T: “The material form in what has thus come to be is included in the material form aggregate affected by clinging. The feeling in what has thus come to be is included in the feeling aggregate affected by clinging. The perception in what has thus come to be is included in the perception aggregate affected by clinging. The formations in what has thus come to be are included in the formations aggregate affected by clinging. The consciousness in what has thus come to be is included in the consciousness aggregate affected by clinging.
mn28:38.4 | S: They understand: | T: He understands thus:
mn28:38.5 | S: ‘So this is how there comes to be inclusion, gathering together, and assimilation into these five grasping aggregates. | T: ‘This, indeed, is how there comes to be the inclusion, gathering, and amassing of things into these five aggregates affected by clinging.
mn28:38.6 | S: But the Buddha has also said: | T: Now this has been said by the Blessed One:
mn28:38.7 | S: “One who sees dependent origination sees the teaching. | T: “One who sees dependent origination sees the Dhamma;
mn28:38.8 | S: One who sees the teaching sees dependent origination.” | T: one who sees the Dhamma sees dependent origination.”
mn28:38.9 | S: And these five grasping aggregates are indeed dependently originated. | T: And these five aggregates affected by clinging are dependently arisen.
mn28:38.10 | S: The desire, clinging, attraction, and attachment for these five grasping aggregates is the origin of suffering. | T: The desire, indulgence, inclination, and holding based on these five aggregates affected by clinging is the origin of suffering.
mn28:38.11 | S: Giving up and getting rid of desire and greed for these five grasping aggregates is the cessation of suffering.’ | T: The removal of desire and lust, the abandonment of desire and lust for these five aggregates affected by clinging is the cessation of suffering.’
mn28:38.12 | S: At this point, much has been done by that mendicant.” | T: At that point too, friends, much has been done by that bhikkhu.”
mn28:38.13 | S: That is what Venerable Sāriputta said. | T: That is what the venerable Sāriputta said.
mn28:38.14 | S: Satisfied, the mendicants approved what Sāriputta said. | T: The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the venerable Sāriputta’s words.

## an10.18
an10.18:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: (none)
an10.18:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. | T: (none)
an10.18:1.3 | S: There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, | T: (none)
an10.18:1.4 | S: “Mendicants!” | T: “Bhikkhus,
an10.18:1.5 | S: “Venerable sir,” they replied. | T: (none)
an10.18:1.6 | S: The Buddha said this: | T: (none)
an10.18:2.1 | S: “Mendicants, you should live with a protector, not without one. | T: live under a protector, not without a protector.
an10.18:2.2 | S: Living without a protector is suffering. | T: One without a protector lives in suffering.
an10.18:2.3 | S: There are ten qualities that serve as protector. | T: There are these ten qualities that serve as a protector.
an10.18:2.4 | S: What ten? | T: What ten?
an10.18:2.5 | S: Firstly, a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. | T: (1) “Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults. Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
an10.18:2.6 | S: Knowing this, the mendicants—whether senior, middle, or junior—think that mendicant is worth advising and instructing. | T: Having considered: ‘This bhikkhu is truly virtuous…. Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them,’ the elder bhikkhus, those of middle standing, and the junior bhikkhus think he should be corrected and instructed.
an10.18:2.7 | S: Being treated with such kindness by the senior, middle, and junior mendicants, that mendicant can expect only growth, not decline. | T: Since they all have compassion for him, only growth in wholesome qualities and not decline is to be expected for him.
an10.18:2.8 | S: This is a quality that serves as protector. | T: This is a quality that serves as a protector.
an10.18:3.1 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant is very learned, remembering and keeping what they’ve learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them, reinforcing them by recitation, mentally scrutinizing them, and penetrating them theoretically. | T: (2) “Again, a bhikkhu has learned much, remembers what he has learned, and accumulates what he has learned. Those teachings that are good in the beginning … with the right meaning and phrasing, which proclaim the perfectly complete and pure spiritual life—such teachings as these he has learned much of, retained in mind, recited verbally, investigated mentally, and penetrated well by view.
an10.18:3.2 | S: Knowing this, the mendicants—whether senior, middle, or junior—think that mendicant is worth advising and instructing. | T: Having considered: ‘This bhikkhu has truly learned much … and penetrated well by view,’ the elder bhikkhus, those of middle standing, and the junior bhikkhus think he should be corrected and instructed.
an10.18:3.3 | S: Being treated with such kindness by the senior, middle, and junior mendicants, that mendicant can expect only growth, not decline. | T: Since they all have compassion for him, only growth in wholesome qualities and not decline is to be expected for him.
an10.18:3.4 | S: This too is a quality that serves as protector. | T: This, too, is a quality that serves as a protector.
an10.18:4.1 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant has good friends, companions, and associates. | T: (3) “Again, a bhikkhu has good friends, good companions, good comrades.
an10.18:4.2 | S: Knowing this, the mendicants—whether senior, middle, or junior—think that mendicant is worth advising and instructing. | T: Having considered: ‘This bhikkhu truly has good friends, good companions, good comrades,’ the elder bhikkhus, those of middle standing, and the junior bhikkhus think he should be corrected and instructed.
an10.18:4.3 | S: Being treated with such kindness by the senior, middle, and junior mendicants, that mendicant can expect only growth, not decline. | T: Since they all have compassion for him, only growth in wholesome qualities and not decline is to be expected for him.
an10.18:4.4 | S: This too is a quality that serves as protector. | T: This, too, is a quality that serves as a protector.
an10.18:5.1 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant is easy to admonish, having qualities that make them easy to admonish. They’re patient, and take instruction respectfully. | T: (4) “Again, a bhikkhu is easy to correct and possesses qualities that make him easy to correct; he is patient and receives instruction respectfully.
an10.18:5.2 | S: Knowing this, the mendicants—whether senior, middle, or junior—think that mendicant is worth advising and instructing. | T: Having considered: ‘This bhikkhu is truly easy to correct and possesses qualities that make him easy to correct; he is patient and receives instruction respectfully,’ the elder bhikkhus, those of middle standing, and the junior bhikkhus think he should be corrected and instructed.
an10.18:5.3 | S: Being treated with such kindness by the senior, middle, and junior mendicants, that mendicant can expect only growth, not decline. | T: Since they all have compassion for him, only growth in wholesome qualities and not decline is to be expected for him.
an10.18:5.4 | S: This too is a quality that serves as protector. | T: This, too, is a quality that serves as a protector.
an10.18:6.1 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant is deft and tireless in a diverse spectrum of duties for their spiritual companions, understanding how to go about things in order to complete and organize the work. | T: (5) “Again, a bhikkhu is skillful and diligent in attending to the diverse chores that are to be done for his fellow monks; he possesses sound judgment about them in order to carry out and arrange them properly.
an10.18:6.2 | S: Knowing this, the mendicants—whether senior, middle, or junior—think that mendicant is worth advising and instructing. | T: Having considered: ‘This bhikkhu is truly skillful and diligent … in order to carry out and arrange them properly,’ the elder bhikkhus, those of middle standing, and the junior bhikkhus think he should be corrected and instructed.
an10.18:6.3 | S: Being treated with such kindness by the senior, middle, and junior mendicants, that mendicant can expect only growth, not decline. | T: Since they all have compassion for him, only growth in wholesome qualities and not decline is to be expected for him.
an10.18:6.4 | S: This too is a quality that serves as protector. | T: This, too, is a quality that serves as a protector.
an10.18:7.1 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant loves the teachings and is a delight to converse with, being full of joy in the teaching and training. | T: (6) “Again, a bhikkhu loves the Dhamma and is pleasing in his assertions, filled with a lofty joy pertaining to the Dhamma and discipline.
an10.18:7.2 | S: Knowing this, the mendicants—whether senior, middle, or junior—think that mendicant is worth advising and instructing. | T: Having considered: ‘This bhikkhu truly loves the Dhamma and is pleasing in his assertions, filled with a lofty joy pertaining to the Dhamma and discipline,’ the elder bhikkhus, those of middle standing, and the junior bhikkhus think he should be corrected and instructed.
an10.18:7.3 | S: Being treated with such kindness by the senior, middle, and junior mendicants, that mendicant can expect only growth, not decline. | T: Since they all have compassion for him, only growth in wholesome qualities and not decline is to be expected for him.
an10.18:7.4 | S: This too is a quality that serves as protector. | T: This, too, is a quality that serves as a protector.
an10.18:8.1 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant lives with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They are strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities. | T: (7) “Again, a bhikkhu has aroused energy for abandoning unwholesome qualities and acquiring wholesome qualities; he is strong, firm in exertion, not casting off the duty of cultivating wholesome qualities.
an10.18:8.2 | S: Knowing this, the mendicants—whether senior, middle, or junior—think that mendicant is worth advising and instructing. | T: Having considered: ‘This bhikkhu truly has aroused energy … … not casting off the duty of cultivating wholesome qualities,’ the elder bhikkhus, those of middle standing, and the junior bhikkhus think he should be corrected and instructed.
an10.18:8.3 | S: Being treated with such kindness by the senior, middle, and junior mendicants, that mendicant can expect only growth, not decline. | T: Since they all have compassion for him, only growth in wholesome qualities and not decline is to be expected for him.
an10.18:8.4 | S: This too is a quality that serves as protector. | T: This, too, is a quality that serves as a protector.
an10.18:9.1 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant is content with any kind of robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. | T: (8) “Again, a bhikkhu is content with any kind of robe, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and provisions for the sick.
an10.18:9.2 | S: Knowing this, the mendicants—whether senior, middle, or junior—think that mendicant is worth advising and instructing. | T: Having considered: ‘This bhikkhu truly is content with any kind of robe, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and provisions for the sick,’ the elder bhikkhus, those of middle standing, and the junior bhikkhus think he should be corrected and instructed.
an10.18:9.3 | S: Being treated with such kindness by the senior, middle, and junior mendicants, that mendicant can expect only growth, not decline. | T: Since they all have compassion for him, only growth in wholesome qualities and not decline is to be expected for him.
an10.18:9.4 | S: This too is a quality that serves as protector. | T: This, too, is a quality that serves as a protector.
an10.18:10.1 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant is mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and alertness, and can remember and recall what was said and done long ago. | T: (9) “Again, a bhikkhu is mindful, possessing supreme mindfulness and alertness, one who remembers and recollects what was done and said long ago.
an10.18:10.2 | S: Knowing this, the mendicants—whether senior, middle, or junior—think that mendicant is worth advising and instructing. | T: Having considered: ‘This bhikkhu truly is mindful, possessing supreme mindfulness and alertness, one who remembers and recollects what was done and said long ago,’ the elder bhikkhus, those of middle standing, and the junior bhikkhus think he should be corrected and instructed.
an10.18:10.3 | S: Being treated with such kindness by the senior, middle, and junior mendicants, that mendicant can expect only growth, not decline. | T: Since they all have compassion for him, only growth in wholesome qualities and not decline is to be expected for him.
an10.18:10.4 | S: This too is a quality that serves as protector. | T: This, too, is a quality that serves as a protector.
an10.18:11.1 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. | T: (10) “Again, a bhikkhu is wise; he possesses the wisdom that discerns arising and passing away, which is noble and penetrative and leads to the complete destruction of suffering.
an10.18:11.2 | S: Knowing this, the mendicants—whether senior, middle, or junior—think that mendicant is worth advising and instructing. | T: Having considered: ‘This bhikkhu truly is wise; he possesses the wisdom that discerns arising and passing away, which is noble and penetrative and leads to the complete destruction of suffering,’ the elder bhikkhus, those of middle standing, and the junior bhikkhus think he should be corrected and instructed.
an10.18:11.3 | S: Being treated with such kindness by the senior, middle, and junior mendicants, that mendicant can expect only growth, not decline. | T: Since they all have compassion for him, only growth in wholesome qualities and not decline is to be expected for him.
an10.18:11.4 | S: This too is a quality that serves as protector. | T: This, too, is a quality that serves as a protector.
an10.18:12.1 | S: You should live with a protector, not without one. | T: “Bhikkhus, live under a protector, not without a protector.
an10.18:12.2 | S: Living without a protector is suffering. | T: One without a protector lives in suffering.
an10.18:12.3 | S: These are the ten qualities that serve as protector.” | T: These are the ten qualities that serve as a protector.”
an10.18:12.4 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: (none)
an10.18:12.5 | S: Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said. | T: (none)

## mn118
mn118:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Introductory Section Thus have I heard.
mn118:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother in the Eastern Monastery, together with several well-known senior disciples, such as | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in the Eastern Park, in the Palace of Migāra’s Mother, together with many very well known elder disciples—
mn118:1.3 | S: the venerables Sāriputta, Mahāmoggallāna, Mahākassapa, Mahākaccāna, Mahākoṭṭhita, Mahākappina, Mahācunda, Anuruddha, Revata, Ānanda, and others. | T: the venerable Sāriputta, the venerable Mahā Moggallāna, the venerable Mahā Kassapa, the venerable Mahā Kaccāna, the venerable Mahā Koṭṭhita, the venerable Mahā Kappina, the venerable Mahā Cunda, the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable Revata, the venerable Ānanda, and other very well known elder disciples.
mn118:2.1 | S: Now at that time the senior monks were advising and instructing the junior monks. | T: Now on that occasion elder bhikkhus had been teaching and instructing new bhikkhus;
mn118:2.2 | S: Some senior monks instructed ten monks, while some instructed twenty, thirty, or forty. | T: some elder bhikkhus had been teaching and instructing ten bhikkhus, some elder bhikkhus had been teaching and instructing twenty…thirty…forty bhikkhus.
mn118:2.3 | S: Being instructed by the senior monks, the junior monks realized a higher distinction than they had before. | T: And the new bhikkhus, taught and instructed by the elder bhikkhus, had achieved successive stages of high distinction.
mn118:3.1 | S: Now, at that time it was the sabbath—the full moon on the fifteenth day—and the Buddha was sitting surrounded by the Saṅgha of monks for the invitation to admonish. | T: On that occasion—the Uposatha day of the fifteenth, on the full-moon night of the Pavāraṇā ceremony—the Blessed One was seated in the open surrounded by the Sangha of bhikkhus.
mn118:3.2 | S: Then the Buddha looked around the Saṅgha of monks, who were so very silent. He addressed them: | T: Then, surveying the silent Sangha of bhikkhus, he addressed them thus:
mn118:4.1 | S: “I am satisfied, monks, with this practice. | T: “Bhikkhus, I am content with this progress. My mind is content with this progress.
mn118:4.2 | S: My heart is satisfied with this practice. | T: (none)
mn118:4.3 | S: So you should rouse up even more energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. | T: So arouse still more energy to attain the unattained, to achieve the unachieved, to realise the unrealised.
mn118:4.4 | S: I will wait here in Sāvatthī for the Komudī full moon of the fourth month.” | T: I shall wait here at Sāvatthī for the Komudī full moon of the fourth month.”
mn118:5.1 | S: Mendicants from around the country heard about this, | T: The bhikkhus of the countryside heard:
mn118:5.2 | P: “bhagavā kira tattheva sāvatthiyaṁ komudiṁ cātumāsiniṁ āgamessatī”ti. | T: “The Blessed One will wait there at Sāvatthī for the Komudī full moon of the fourth month.”
mn118:5.3 | S: and came down to Sāvatthī to see the Buddha. | T: And the bhikkhus of the countryside left in due course for Sāvatthī to see the Blessed One.
mn118:6.1 | S: And those senior monks instructed the junior monks even more. | T: And elder bhikkhus still more intensively taught and instructed new bhikkhus;
mn118:6.2 | S: Some senior monks instructed ten monks, while some instructed twenty, thirty, or forty. | T: some elder bhikkhus taught and instructed ten bhikkhus, some elder bhikkhus taught and instructed twenty…thirty…forty bhikkhus.
mn118:6.3 | S: Being instructed by the senior monks, the junior monks realized a higher distinction than they had before. | T: And the new bhikkhus, taught and instructed by the elder bhikkhus, achieved successive stages of high distinction.
mn118:7.1 | S: Now, at that time it was the sabbath—the Komudī full moon on the fifteenth day of the fourth month—and the Buddha was sitting in the open surrounded by the Saṅgha of monks. | T: On that occasion—the Uposatha day of the fifteenth, the full-moon night of the Komudī full moon of the fourth month—the Blessed One was seated in the open surrounded by the Sangha of bhikkhus.
mn118:7.2 | S: Then the Buddha looked around the Saṅgha of monks, who were so very silent. He addressed them: | T: Then, surveying the silent Sangha of bhikkhus, he addressed them thus:
mn118:8.1 | S: “This assembly has no chaff, monks, it is free of chaff, pure, and consolidated in the core. | T: “Bhikkhus, this assembly is free from prattle, this assembly is free from chatter. It consists purely of heartwood.
mn118:8.2 | S: Such is this Saṅgha of monks, such is this assembly! | T: Such is this Sangha of bhikkhus, such is this assembly.
mn118:8.3 | S: An assembly such as this is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with cupped palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world. | T: Such an assembly as is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an incomparable field of merit for the world—
mn118:8.4 | S: Such is this Saṅgha of monks, such is this assembly! | T: such is this Sangha of bhikkhus, such is this assembly.
mn118:8.5 | S: For an assembly such as this, giving little becomes much, while giving much becomes even more. | T: Such an assembly that a small gift given to it becomes great and a great gift greater—
mn118:8.6 | S: Such is this Saṅgha of monks, such is this assembly! | T: such is this Sangha of bhikkhus, such is this assembly.
mn118:8.7 | S: An assembly such as this is rarely seen in the world. | T: Such an assembly as is rare for the world to see—
mn118:8.8 | S: Such is this Saṅgha of monks, such is this assembly! | T: such is this Sangha of bhikkhus, such is this assembly.
mn118:8.9 | S: An assembly such as this is worth traveling many leagues to see, even if you have to carry your own provisions in a knapsack. | T: Such an assembly as would be worth journeying many leagues with a travel-bag to see—such is this Sangha of bhikkhus, such is this assembly.
mn118:9.1 | S: For in this Saṅgha there are perfected mendicants who have ended the defilements, completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their heart’s goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and are rightly freed through enlightenment. | T: “In this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who are arahants with taints destroyed, who have lived the holy life, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, reached their own goal, destroyed the fetters of being, and are completely liberated through final knowledge—
mn118:9.2 | S: There are such mendicants in this Saṅgha. | T: such bhikkhus are there in this Sangha of bhikkhus.
mn118:10.1 | S: In this Saṅgha there are mendicants who, with the ending of the five lower fetters are reborn spontaneously. They are extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. | T: “In this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who, with the destruction of the five lower fetters, are due to reappear spontaneously in the Pure Abodes and there attain final Nibbāna, without ever returning from that world—
mn118:10.2 | S: There are such mendicants in this Saṅgha. | T: such bhikkhus are there in this Sangha of bhikkhus.
mn118:11.1 | S: In this Saṅgha there are mendicants who, with the ending of three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, are once-returners. They come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering. | T: “In this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who, with the destruction of three fetters and with the attenuation of lust, hate, and delusion, are once-returners, returning once to this world to make an end of suffering—
mn118:11.2 | S: There are such mendicants in this Saṅgha. | T: such bhikkhus are there in this Sangha of bhikkhus.
mn118:12.1 | S: In this Saṅgha there are mendicants who, with the ending of three fetters are stream-enterers, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, assured, destined for awakening. | T: “In this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who, with the destruction of the three fetters, are stream-enterers, no longer subject to perdition, bound for deliverance, headed for enlightenment—
mn118:12.2 | S: There are such mendicants in this Saṅgha. | T: such bhikkhus are there in this Sangha of bhikkhus.
mn118:13.1 | S: In this Saṅgha there are mendicants who are committed to developing the four kinds of mindfulness meditation … | T: “In this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who abide devoted to the development of the four foundations of mindfulness—such bhikkhus are there in this Sangha of bhikkhus.
mn118:14.1 | S: the four right efforts … | T: In this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who abide devoted to the development of the four right kinds of striving…of the four bases for spiritual power…of the five faculties…of the five powers…of the seven enlightenment factors…of the Noble Eightfold Path—
mn118:14.2 | S: the four bases of psychic power … | T: (none)
mn118:14.3 | S: the five faculties … | T: (none)
mn118:14.4 | S: the five powers … | T: (none)
mn118:14.5 | S: the seven awakening factors … | T: (none)
mn118:14.6 | S: the noble eightfold path. | T: (none)
mn118:14.7 | S: There are such mendicants in this Saṅgha. | T: such bhikkhus are there in this Sangha of bhikkhus.
mn118:14.8 | S: In this Saṅgha there are mendicants who are committed to developing the meditation on love … | T: “In this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who abide devoted to the development of loving-kindness …of compassion…of altruistic joy…of equanimity…of the meditation on foulness…of the perception of impermanence—
mn118:14.9 | S: compassion … | T: (none)
mn118:14.10 | S: rejoicing … | T: (none)
mn118:14.11 | S: equanimity … | T: (none)
mn118:14.12 | S: ugliness … | T: (none)
mn118:14.13 | S: impermanence. | T: (none)
mn118:14.14 | S: There are such mendicants in this Saṅgha. | T: such bhikkhus are there in this Sangha of bhikkhus.
mn118:14.15 | S: In this Saṅgha there are mendicants who are committed to developing the meditation on mindfulness of breathing. | T: In this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who abide devoted to the development of mindfulness of breathing.
mn118:15.1 | S: Mendicants, when mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated it is very fruitful and beneficial. | T: Mindfulness of Breathing “Bhikkhus, when mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated, it is of great fruit and great benefit.
mn118:15.2 | S: Mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated, fulfills the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. | T: When mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated, it fulfils the four foundations of mindfulness.
mn118:15.3 | S: The four kinds of mindfulness meditation, when developed and cultivated, fulfill the seven awakening factors. | T: When the four foundations of mindfulness are developed and cultivated, they fulfil the seven enlightenment factors.
mn118:15.4 | S: And the seven awakening factors, when developed and cultivated, fulfill knowledge and freedom. | T: When the seven enlightenment factors are developed and cultivated, they fulfil true knowledge and deliverance.
mn118:16.1 | S: And how is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated to be very fruitful and beneficial? | T: “And how, bhikkhus, is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated, so that it is of great fruit and great benefit?
mn118:17.1 | S: It’s when a mendicant—gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut—sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight, and brings mindfulness to the present. | T: “Here a bhikkhu, gone to the forest or to the root of a tree or to an empty hut, sits down; having folded his legs crosswise, set his body erect, and established mindfulness in front of him,
mn118:17.2 | S: Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out. | T: ever mindful he breathes in, mindful he breathes out.
mn118:18.1 | S: Breathing in heavily they know: ‘I’m breathing in heavily.’ Breathing out heavily they know: ‘I’m breathing out heavily.’ | T: “Breathing in long, he understands: ‘I breathe in long’; or breathing out long, he understands: ‘I breathe out long.’
mn118:18.2 | S: Breathing in lightly they know: ‘I’m breathing in lightly.’ Breathing out lightly they know: ‘I’m breathing out lightly.’ | T: Breathing in short, he understands: ‘I breathe in short’; or breathing out short, he understands: ‘I breathe out short.’
mn118:18.3 | S: They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in experiencing the whole body.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out experiencing the whole body.’ | T: He trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in experiencing the whole body of breath’; he trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out experiencing the whole body of breath.’
mn118:18.4 | S: They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in stilling the physical process.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out stilling the physical process.’ | T: He trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in tranquillising the bodily formation’; he trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out tranquillising the bodily formation.’
mn118:19.1 | S: They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in experiencing rapture.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out experiencing rapture.’ | T: “He trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in experiencing rapture’; he trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out experiencing rapture.’
mn118:19.2 | S: They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in experiencing bliss.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out experiencing bliss.’ | T: He trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in experiencing pleasure’; he trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out experiencing pleasure.’
mn118:19.3 | S: They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in experiencing the mental process.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out experiencing the mental process.’ | T: He trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in experiencing the mental formation’; he trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out experiencing the mental formation.
mn118:19.4 | S: They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in stilling the mental process.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out stilling the mental process.’ | T: ’ He trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in tranquillising the mental formation’; he trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out tranquillising the mental formation.’
