## sn35.81
sn35.81:1.1 | S: Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha … and asked him, | T: Then a number of bhikkhus approached the Blessed One … and said to him:
sn35.81:1.2 | S: “Sir, sometimes wanderers of other religions ask us: | T: “Here, venerable sir, wanderers of other sects ask us:
sn35.81:1.3 | S: ‘Reverends, what’s the goal of leading the spiritual life under the ascetic Gotama?’ | T: ‘For what purpose, friends, is the holy life lived under the ascetic Gotama?’
sn35.81:1.4 | S: We answer them like this: | T: When we are asked thus, venerable sir, we answer those wanderers thus:
sn35.81:1.5 | S: ‘The goal of leading the spiritual life under the Buddha is to completely understand suffering.’ | T: ‘It is, friends, for the full understanding of suffering that the holy life is lived under the Blessed One.’
sn35.81:1.6 | S: Answering this way, we trust that we repeat what the Buddha has said, and don’t misrepresent him with an untruth. We trust our explanation is in line with the teaching, and that there are no legitimate grounds for rebuttal or criticism.” | T: We hope, venerable sir, that when we answer thus we state what has been said by the Blessed One and do not misrepresent him with what is contrary to fact; that we explain in accordance with the Dhamma, and that no reasonable consequence of our assertion gives ground for criticism.”
sn35.81:2.1 | S: “Indeed, in answering this way you repeat what I’ve said, and don’t misrepresent me with an untruth. Your explanation is in line with the teaching, and there are no legitimate grounds for rebuttal or criticism. | T: “For sure, bhikkhus, when you answer thus you state what has been said by me and do not misrepresent me with what is contrary to fact; you explain in accordance with the Dhamma, and no reasonable consequence of your assertion gives ground for criticism.
sn35.81:2.2 | S: For the goal of leading the spiritual life under me is to completely understand suffering. | T: For, bhikkhus, it is for the full understanding of suffering that the holy life is lived under me.
sn35.81:2.3 | S: If wanderers of other religions were to ask you: | T: “But, bhikkhus, if wanderers of other sects ask you:
sn35.81:2.4 | S: ‘Reverends, what is that suffering?’ | T: ‘What, friends, is that suffering for the full understanding of which the holy life is lived under the ascetic Gotama?’—
sn35.81:2.5 | S: You should answer them: | T: being asked thus, you should answer them thus:
sn35.81:2.6 | S: ‘Reverends, the eye is suffering. The goal of leading the spiritual life under the Buddha is to completely understand this. | T: ‘The eye, friends, is suffering: it is for the full understanding of this that the holy life is lived under the Blessed One.
sn35.81:2.7 | S: Sights … Eye consciousness … Eye contact … | T: Forms are suffering …
sn35.81:2.8 | S: The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on eye contact is also suffering. | T: Whatever feeling arises with eye-contact as condition … that too is suffering …
sn35.81:2.9 | S: The goal of leading the spiritual life under the Buddha is to completely understand this. | T: (none)
sn35.81:2.10 | S: Ear … Nose … Tongue … Body … Mind … | T: The mind is suffering …
sn35.81:2.11 | S: The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on mind contact is also suffering. | T: Whatever feeling arises with mind-contact as condition … that too is suffering:
sn35.81:2.12 | S: The goal of leading the spiritual life under the Buddha is to completely understand this. | T: it is for the full understanding of this that the holy life is lived under the Blessed One.
sn35.81:2.13 | S: This is that suffering. The goal of leading the spiritual life under the Buddha is to completely understand this.’ | T: This, friends, is that suffering for the full understanding of which the holy life is lived under the Blessed One.’
sn35.81:2.14 | S: When questioned by wanderers of other religions, that’s how you should answer them.” | T: “Being asked thus, bhikkhus, you should answer those wanderers of other sects in such a way.”

## sn4.21
sn4.21:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
sn4.21:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans near Silāvatī. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Sakyans at Silavati.
sn4.21:1.3 | S: Now at that time several mendicants were meditating not far from the Buddha, diligent, keen, and resolute. | T: Now on that occasion a number of bhikkhus were dwelling not far from the Blessed One—diligent, ardent, and resolute.
sn4.21:1.4 | S: Then Māra the Wicked manifested in the form of a brahmin with a large matted dreadlock, wearing an antelope hide. He was old, bent double, wheezing, and held a staff made of cluster fig tree wood. He went up to those mendicants and said, | T: Then Mara the Evil One manifested himself in the form of a brahmin, with a large matted topknot, clad in an antelope hide, old, crooked like a roof bracket, wheezing, holding a staff of udumbara wood. He approached those bhikkhus and said to them:
sn4.21:1.5 | S: “You’ve gone forth while young, reverends.  With pristine black hair, you’re blessed with youth, in the prime of life, and you’ve never flirted with sensual pleasures. | T: “You, sirs, have gone forth while young, lads with black hair, endowed with the blessing of youth, in the prime of life, without having dallied with sensual pleasures.
sn4.21:1.6 | S: Enjoy human sensual pleasures. | T: Enjoy human sensual pleasures, sirs;
sn4.21:1.7 | S: Don’t give up what is apparent in the present to chase after what takes effect over time.” | T: do not abandon what is directly visible in order to pursue what takes time.”
sn4.21:1.8 | S: “Brahmin, that’s not what we’re doing. | T: “We have not abandoned what is directly visible, brahmin, in order to pursue what takes time.
sn4.21:1.9 | S: We’re giving up what takes effect over time to chase after what is apparent in the present. | T: We have abandoned what takes time in order to pursue what is directly visible.
sn4.21:1.10 | S: For the Buddha says that sensual pleasures take effect over time; they give much suffering and distress, and they are all the more full of drawbacks. | T: For the Blessed One, brahmin, has stated that sensual pleasures are time-consuming, full of suffering, full of despair, and the danger in them is still greater,
sn4.21:1.11 | S: But this teaching is apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.” | T: while this Dhamma is directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.”
sn4.21:1.12 | S: When they had spoken, Māra the Wicked shook his head, waggled his tongue, raised his eyebrows until his brow puckered in three furrows, and left leaning on his staff. | T: When this was said, Mara the Evil One shook his head, lolled his tongue, knit his brow into three furrows, and departed leaning on his staff.
sn4.21:2.1 | S: Then those mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. The Buddha said, | T: Then those bhikkhus approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and reported everything in full. The Blessed One said:
sn4.21:3.1 | S: “Mendicants, that was no brahmin. | T: “That was not a brahmin, bhikkhus.
sn4.21:3.2 | S: That was Māra the Wicked who came to pull the wool over your eyes!” | T: That was Mara the Evil One, who had come in order to confound you.”
sn4.21:3.3 | S: Then, understanding this matter, on that occasion the Buddha spoke this verse: | T: Then the Blessed One, having understood the meaning of this, on that occasion recited this verse:
sn4.21:4.1 | S: “When a personage has seen where suffering comes from | T: (none)
sn4.21:4.2 | S: how could they incline toward sensual pleasures? | T: “How could a person incline to sensual pleasures Who has seen the source whence suffering springs?
sn4.21:4.3 | S: Realizing that attachment is a chain in the world, | T: Having known acquisition as a tie in the world,
sn4.21:4.4 | S: a personage would train to remove it.” | T: A person should train for its removal.”

## sn46.54
sn46.54:1.1 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Koliyans, where they have a town named Haliddavasana. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Koliyans, where there was a town of the Koliyans named Haliddavasana.
sn46.54:1.2 | S: Then several mendicants robed up in the morning and, taking their bowls and robes, entered Haliddavasana for alms. | T: Then, in the morning, a number of bhikkhus dressed and, taking their bowls and robes, entered Haliddavasana for alms.
sn46.54:1.3 | S: Then it occurred to them, | T: Then it occurred to them:
sn46.54:1.4 | S: “It’s too early to wander for alms in Haliddavasana. | T: “It is still too early to walk for alms in Haliddavasana.
sn46.54:1.5 | S: Why don’t we visit the monastery for the wanderers of other religions?” | T: Let us go to the park of the wanderers of other sects.”
sn46.54:2.1 | S: Then they went to the monastery for the wanderers of other religions and exchanged greetings with the wanderers there. | T: Then those bhikkhus went to the park of the wanderers of other sects. They exchanged greetings with those wanderers and,
sn46.54:2.2 | S: When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side. The wanderers said to them: | T: when they had concluded their greetings and cordial talk, sat down to one side. The wanderers then said to them:
sn46.54:3.1 | S: “Reverends, the ascetic Gotama teaches his disciples like this: | T: “Friends, the ascetic Gotama teaches the Dhamma to his disciples thus:
sn46.54:3.2 | S: ‘Come, mendicants, give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken wisdom, and meditate spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, spread a heart full of love to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. | T: ‘Come, bhikkhus, abandon the five hindrances, the corruptions of the mind that weaken wisdom, and dwell pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with lovingkindness, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter. Thus above, below, across, and everywhere, and to all as to oneself, dwell pervading the entire world with a mind imbued with lovingkindness, vast, exalted, measureless, without hostility, without ill will.
sn46.54:3.3 | S: Meditate spreading a heart full of compassion to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, spread a heart full of compassion to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. | T: Dwell pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with compassion, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter. Thus above, below, across, and everywhere, and to all as to oneself, dwell pervading the entire world with a mind imbued with compassion, vast, exalted, measureless, without hostility, without ill will.
sn46.54:3.4 | S: Meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, spread a heart full of rejoicing to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. | T: Dwell pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with altruistic joy, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter. Thus above, below, across, and everywhere, and to all as to oneself, dwell pervading the entire world with a mind imbued with altruistic joy, vast, exalted, measureless, without hostility, without ill will.
sn46.54:3.5 | S: Meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.’ | T: Dwell pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with equanimity, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter. Thus above, below, across, and everywhere, and to all as to oneself, dwell pervading the entire world with a mind imbued with equanimity, vast, exalted, measureless, without hostility, without ill will.’
sn46.54:4.1 | S: We too teach our disciples in just the same way. | T: “We too, friends, teach the Dhamma to our disciples thus:
sn46.54:4.2 | P: ‘etha tumhe, āvuso, pañca nīvaraṇe pahāya cetaso upakkilese paññāya dubbalīkaraṇe mettāsahagatena cetasā ekaṁ disaṁ pharitvā viharatha …pe… | T: ‘Come, friends, abandon the five hindrances … all as above … dwell pervading the entire world with a mind imbued with lovingkindness …
sn46.54:4.3 | P: karuṇāsahagatena cetasā … | T: compassion …
sn46.54:4.4 | P: muditāsahagatena cetasā … | T: altruistic joy …
sn46.54:4.6 | P: iti uddhamadho tiriyaṁ sabbadhi sabbattatāya sabbāvantaṁ lokaṁ upekkhāsahagatena cetasā vipulena mahaggatena appamāṇena averena abyāpajjena pharitvā viharathā’ti. | T: equanimity … without ill will.’
sn46.54:4.7 | S: What, then, is the difference between the ascetic Gotama’s teaching and instruction and ours?” | T: So, friends, what here is the distinction, the disparity, the difference between the ascetic Gotama and us, that is, regarding the one Dhamma teaching and the other, regarding the one manner of instruction and the other?”
sn46.54:5.1 | S: Those mendicants neither approved nor rejected that statement of the wanderers of other religions. | T: Then those bhikkhus neither delighted in nor rejected the statement of those wanderers. Without delighting in it, without rejecting it,
sn46.54:5.2 | S: They rose from their seats, thinking: | T: they rose from their seats and left, thinking,
sn46.54:5.3 | S: “We will learn the meaning of this statement from the Buddha himself.” | T: “We shall learn the meaning of this statement in the presence of the Blessed One.”
sn46.54:5.4 | S: Then, after the meal, when they returned from almsround, they went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. | T: Then, when those bhikkhus had walked for alms in Haliddavasana and had returned from the alms round, after their meal they approached the Blessed One. Having paid homage to him, they sat down to one side and reported to him the entire discussion between those wanderers and themselves. The Blessed One said:
sn46.54:11.1 | S: “Mendicants, when wanderers of other religions say this, you should say to them: | T: “Bhikkhus, when wanderers of other sects speak thus,
sn46.54:11.2 | S: ‘But reverends, how is the heart’s release by love developed? What is its destination, apex, fruit, and culmination? | T: they should be asked: ‘Friends, how is the liberation of the mind by lovingkindness developed? What does it have as its destination, its culmination, its fruit, its final goal?
sn46.54:11.3 | S: How is the heart’s release by compassion developed? What is its destination, apex, fruit, and end? | T: How is the liberation of the mind by compassion developed? What does it have as its destination, its culmination, its fruit, its final goal?
sn46.54:11.4 | S: How is the heart’s release by rejoicing developed? What is its destination, apex, fruit, and end? | T: How is the liberation of the mind by altruistic joy developed? What does it have as its destination, its culmination, its fruit, its final goal?
sn46.54:11.5 | S: How is the heart’s release by equanimity developed? What is its destination, apex, fruit, and end?’ | T: How is the liberation of the mind by equanimity developed? What does it have as its destination, its culmination, its fruit, its final goal?’
sn46.54:11.6 | S: Questioned like this, the wanderers of other religions would be stumped, and, in addition, would get frustrated. | T: Being asked thus, those wanderers would not be able to reply and, further, they would meet with vexation.
sn46.54:11.7 | S: Why is that? | T: For what reason?
sn46.54:11.8 | S: Because they’re out of their element. | T: Because that would not be within their domain.
sn46.54:11.9 | S: I don’t see anyone in this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans—who could provide a satisfying answer to these questions except the Realized One or his disciple or someone who has heard it from them. | T: I do not see anyone, bhikkhus, in this world with its devas, Mara, and Brahma, in this generation with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans, who could satisfy the mind with an answer to these questions except the Tathagata or a disciple of the Tathagata or one who has heard it from them.
sn46.54:12.1 | S: And how is the heart’s release by love developed? What is its destination, apex, fruit, and end? | T: “And how, bhikkhus, is the liberation of the mind by lovingkindness developed? What does it have as its destination, its culmination, its fruit, its final goal?
sn46.54:12.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant develops the heart’s release by love together with the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, | T: Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu develops the enlightenment factor of mindfulness accompanied by lovingkindness … the enlightenment factor of equanimity accompanied by lovingkindness,
sn46.54:12.3 | S: and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. | T: based upon seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, maturing in release.
sn46.54:12.4 | S: If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do. | T: If he wishes: ‘May I dwell perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive,’ he dwells perceiving the repulsive therein.
sn46.54:12.5 | S: If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive,’ that’s what they do. | T: If he wishes: ‘May I dwell perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive,’ he dwells perceiving the unrepulsive therein.
sn46.54:12.6 | S: If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive and the repulsive,’ that’s what they do. | T: If he wishes: ‘May I dwell perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive and in the repulsive,’ he dwells perceiving the repulsive therein.
sn46.54:12.7 | S: If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive and the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do. | T: If he wishes: ‘May I dwell perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive and in the unrepulsive,’ he dwells perceiving the unrepulsive therein.
sn46.54:12.8 | S: If they wish: ‘May I meditate staying equanimous, mindful and aware, shunning both the repulsive and the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do. | T: If he wishes: ‘Avoiding both the unrepulsive and the repulsive, may I dwell equanimously, mindful and clearly comprehending,’ then he dwells therein equanimously, mindful and clearly comprehending. Or else he enters and dwells in the deliverance of the beautiful.
sn46.54:12.9 | S: The apex of the heart’s release by love is the beautiful, I say, for a wise mendicant here who has not penetrated to a higher freedom. | T: Bhikkhus, the liberation of mind by lovingkindness has the beautiful as its culmination, I say, for a wise bhikkhu here who has not penetrated to a superior liberation.
sn46.54:13.1 | S: And how is the heart’s release by compassion developed? What is its destination, apex, fruit, and end? | T: “And how, bhikkhus, is the liberation of the mind by compassion developed? What does it have as its destination, its culmination, its fruit, its final goal?
sn46.54:13.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant develops the heart’s release by compassion together with the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, | T: Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu develops the enlightenment factor of mindfulness accompanied by compassion … the enlightenment factor of equanimity accompanied by compassion,
sn46.54:13.3 | S: and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. | T: based upon seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, maturing in release.
sn46.54:13.4 | S: If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do. … | T: If he wishes: ‘May I dwell perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive,’ he dwells perceiving the repulsive therein….
sn46.54:13.5 | S: If they wish: ‘May I meditate staying equanimous, mindful and aware, shunning both the repulsive and the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do. | T: If he wishes: ‘Avoiding both the unrepulsive and the repulsive, may I dwell equanimously, mindful and clearly comprehending,’ then he dwells therein equanimously, mindful and clearly comprehending.
sn46.54:13.6 | S: Or else, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite’, they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite space. | T: Or else, with the complete transcendence of perceptions of forms, with the passing away of perceptions of sensory impingement, with nonattention to perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite,’ he enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of space.
sn46.54:13.7 | S: The apex of the heart’s release by compassion is the dimension of infinite space, I say, for a wise mendicant here who has not penetrated to a higher freedom. | T: Bhikkhus, the liberation of mind by compassion has the base of the infinity of space as its culmination, I say, for a wise bhikkhu here who has not penetrated to a superior liberation.
sn46.54:14.1 | S: And how is the heart’s release by rejoicing developed? What is its destination, apex, fruit, and end? | T: “And how, bhikkhus, is the liberation of the mind by altruistic joy developed? What does it have as its destination, its culmination, its fruit, its final goal?
sn46.54:14.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant develops the heart’s release by rejoicing together with the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, | T: Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu develops the enlightenment factor of mindfulness accompanied by altruistic joy … the enlightenment factor of equanimity accompanied by altruistic joy,
sn46.54:14.3 | S: and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. | T: based upon seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, maturing in release.
sn46.54:14.4 | S: If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do. … | T: If he wishes: ‘May I dwell perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive,’ he dwells perceiving the repulsive therein….
sn46.54:14.5 | S: If they wish: ‘May I meditate staying equanimous, mindful and aware, shunning both the repulsive and the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do. | T: If he wishes: ‘Avoiding both the unrepulsive and the repulsive, may I dwell equanimously, mindful and clearly comprehending, ’ then he dwells therein equanimously, mindful and clearly comprehending.
sn46.54:14.6 | S: Or else, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite’, they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite consciousness. | T: Or else, by completely transcending the base of the infinity of space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite,’ he enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of consciousness.
sn46.54:14.7 | S: The apex of the heart’s release by rejoicing is the dimension of infinite consciousness, I say, for a wise mendicant here who has not penetrated to a higher freedom. | T: Bhikkhus, the liberation of mind by altruistic joy has the base of the infinity of consciousness as its culmination, I say, for a wise bhikkhu here who has not penetrated to a superior liberation.
sn46.54:15.1 | S: And how is the heart’s release by equanimity developed? What is its destination, apex, fruit, and end? | T: “And how, bhikkhus, is the liberation of the mind by equanimity developed? What does it have as its destination, its culmination, its fruit, its final goal?
sn46.54:15.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant develops the heart’s release by equanimity together with the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, | T: Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu develops the enlightenment factor of mindfulness accompanied by equanimity … the enlightenment factor of equanimity accompanied by equanimity,
sn46.54:15.3 | S: and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. | T: based upon seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, maturing in release.
sn46.54:15.4 | S: If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do. | T: If he wishes: ‘May I dwell perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive,’ he dwells perceiving the repulsive therein….
sn46.54:15.5 | S: If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive,’ that’s what they do. | T: (none)
sn46.54:15.6 | S: If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive and the repulsive,’ that’s what they do. | T: (none)
sn46.54:15.7 | S: If they wish: ‘May I meditate perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive and the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do. | T: (none)
sn46.54:15.8 | S: If they wish: ‘May I meditate staying equanimous, mindful and aware, shunning both the repulsive and the unrepulsive,’ that’s what they do. | T: If he wishes: ‘Avoiding both the unrepulsive and the repulsive, may I dwell equanimously, mindful and clearly comprehending,’ then he dwells therein equanimously, mindful and clearly comprehending.
sn46.54:15.9 | S: Or else, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing at all’, they enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness. | T: Or else, by completely transcending the base of the infinity of consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing,’ he enters and dwells in the base of nothingness.
sn46.54:15.10 | S: The apex of the heart’s release by equanimity is the dimension of nothingness, I say, for a wise mendicant here who has not penetrated to a higher freedom.” | T: Bhikkhus, the liberation of mind by equanimity has the base of nothingness as its culmination, I say, for a wise bhikkhu here who has not penetrated to a superior liberation.”

## an4.22
an4.22:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, this one time, when I was first awakened, I was staying in Uruvelā at the goatherd’s banyan tree on the bank of the Nerañjarā River. | T: “Bhikkhus, on one occasion I was dwelling at Uruvelā, by the goatherds’ banyan tree on the bank of the Neranjarā River, just after I had attained full enlightenment.
an4.22:1.2 | S: Then several old brahmins—elderly and senior, who were advanced in years and had reached the final stage of life—came up to me, and exchanged greetings with me. | T: Then a number of brahmins, old, aged, burdened with years, advanced in life, come to the last stage, approached me and exchanged greetings with me.
an4.22:1.3 | S: When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side, and said to me: | T: When they had concluded their greetings and cordial talk, they sat down to one side and said to me:
an4.22:1.4 | S: ‘Worthy Gotama, we have heard this: | T: “‘We have heard, Master Gotama:
an4.22:1.5 | S: “The ascetic Gotama does not bow to old brahmins, elderly and senior, who are advanced in years and have reached the final stage of life; nor does he rise in their presence or offer them a seat.” | T: “The ascetic Gotama does not pay homage to brahmins who are old, aged, burdened with years, advanced in life, come to the last stage; nor does he stand up for them or offer them a seat.”
an4.22:1.6 | S: And this is indeed the case, | T: This is indeed true,
an4.22:1.7 | S: for the worthy Gotama does not bow to old brahmins, elderly and senior, who are advanced in years and have reached the final stage of life; nor does he rise in their presence or offer them a seat. | T: for Master Gotama does not pay homage to brahmins who are old, aged, burdened with years, advanced in life, come to the last stage; nor does he stand up for them or offer them a seat.
an4.22:1.8 | S: This is not appropriate, worthy Gotama.’ | T: This is not proper, Master Gotama.’
an4.22:2.1 | S: Then it occurred to me, | T: “It then occurred to me:
an4.22:2.2 | S: ‘These venerables don’t know what a senior is, or what qualities make you a senior.’ | T: These venerable ones do not know what an elder is or what the qualities that make one an elder are.
an4.22:2.3 | S: Mendicants, suppose you’re eighty, ninety, or a hundred years old. | T: Even though someone is old—eighty, ninety, or a hundred years from birth—
an4.22:2.4 | S: But your speech is untimely, false, meaningless, and against the teaching or training. You say things at the wrong time which are worthless, unreasonable, rambling, and unbeneficial. | T: if he speaks at an improper time, speaks falsely, speaks what is unbeneficial, speaks contrary to the Dhamma and the discipline, if at an improper time he speaks words that are worthless, unreasonable, rambling, and unbeneficial,
an4.22:2.5 | S: Then you’ll be reckoned a ‘childish senior’. | T: then he is reckoned as a foolish childish elder.
an4.22:3.1 | S: Now suppose you’re a youth, young, with pristine black hair, blessed with youth, in the prime of life. | T: “But even though someone is young, a youth with black hair, endowed with the blessing of youth, in the prime of life,
an4.22:3.2 | S: But your speech is timely, true, meaningful, and in line with the teaching and training. You say things at the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial. | T: if he speaks at a proper time, speaks what is truthful, speaks what is beneficial, speaks on the Dhamma and the discipline, and if at a proper time he speaks words that are worth recording, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial,
an4.22:3.3 | S: Then you’ll be reckoned an ‘astute senior’. | T: then he is reckoned as a wise elder.
an4.22:4.1 | S: There are these four qualities that make a senior. | T: “There are, bhikkhus, these four qualities that make one an elder.
an4.22:4.2 | S: What four? | T: What four?
an4.22:4.3 | S: A mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. | T: (1) “Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults. Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
an4.22:4.4 | S: They’re very learned, remembering and keeping what they’ve learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and penetrating them theoretically. | T: (2) “He has learned much, remembers what he has learned, and accumulates what he has learned. Those teachings that are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing, which proclaim the perfectly complete and pure spiritual life—such teachings as these he has learned much of, retained in mind, recited verbally, investigated with the mind, and penetrated well by view.
an4.22:4.5 | S: They get the four absorptions—blissful meditations in this life that belong to the higher mind—when they want, without trouble or difficulty. | T: (3) “He is one who gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life.
an4.22:4.6 | S: They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom. And they live having realized it with their own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements. | T: (4) “With the destruction of the taints, he has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
an4.22:4.7 | S: These are the four qualities that make a senior. | T: “These are the four qualities that make one an elder.”
an4.22:5.1 | S: The creature with a restless mind | T: The dullard with a restless mind
an4.22:5.2 | S: speaks a lot of nonsense. | T: who speaks much chatter,
an4.22:5.3 | S: Their thoughts are unsettled, | T: his thoughts unsettled,
an4.22:5.4 | S: and they don’t like the true teaching. | T: delighting in a bad teaching,
an4.22:5.5 | S: They’re far from seniority, with their bad views | T: holding bad views, disrespectful, is far from an elder’s stature.
an4.22:5.6 | S: and their lack of regard for others. | T: (none)
an4.22:6.1 | S: But one accomplished in ethics, | T: But one accomplished in virtue,
an4.22:6.2 | S: learned and eloquent, that attentive one | T: learned and discerning,
an4.22:6.3 | S: is restrained when experiencing phenomena, | T: self-controlled in the factors of firmness,
an4.22:6.4 | S: discerning the meaning with wisdom. | T: who clearly sees the meaning with wisdom;
an4.22:7.1 | S: Gone beyond all things, | T: gone beyond all phenomena,
an4.22:7.2 | S: kind, eloquent, | T: not barren, discerning;
an4.22:7.3 | S: they’ve given up birth and death, | T: who has abandoned birth and death,
an4.22:7.4 | S: and have completed the spiritual journey. | T: consummate in the spiritual life, in whom there are no taints—
an4.22:8.1 | S: That’s who I call a senior, | T: he is the one I call an elder.
an4.22:8.2 | S: who has no defilements. | T: (none)
an4.22:8.3 | S: With the ending of defilements, a mendicant | T: With the destruction of the taints
an4.22:8.4 | S: is declared a ‘senior’.” | T: a bhikkhu is called an elder.

## mn82
mn82:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
mn82:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kurus together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he arrived at a town of the Kurus named Thullakoṭṭhika. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering in the Kuru country with a large Sangha of bhikkhus, and eventually he arrived at a Kuru town named Thullakoṭṭhita.
mn82:2.1 | S: The brahmins and householders of Thullakoṭṭhika heard: | T: The brahmin householders of Thullakoṭṭhita heard:
mn82:2.2 | S: “It seems the ascetic Gotama—a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family—has arrived at Thullakoṭṭhika, together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants. | T: “The recluse Gotama, the son of the Sakyans who went forth from a Sakyan clan, has been wandering in the Kuru country with a large Sangha of bhikkhus and has come to Thullakoṭṭhita.
mn82:2.3 | S: He has this good reputation: | T: Now a good report of Master Gotama has been spread to this effect:
mn82:2.4 | S: ‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ | T: ‘That Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened, blessed.
mn82:2.5 | S: He has realized with his own insight this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—and he makes it known to others. | T: He declares this world with its gods, its Māras, and its Brahmās, this generation with its recluses and brahmins, its princes and its people, which he has himself realised with direct knowledge.
mn82:2.6 | S: He teaches Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. | T: He teaches the Dhamma good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing, and he reveals a holy life that is utterly perfect and pure.’
mn82:2.7 | S: It’s good to see such perfected ones.” | T: Now it is good to see such arahants.”
mn82:3.1 | S: Then the brahmins and householders of Thullakoṭṭhika went up to the Buddha. Before sitting down to one side, some bowed, some exchanged greetings and polite conversation, some held up their cupped palms toward the Buddha, some announced their name and clan, while some kept silent. | T: Then the brahmin householders of Thullakoṭṭhita went to the Blessed One. Some paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down at one side; some exchanged greetings with him, and when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, sat down at one side; some extended their hands in reverential salutation towards the Blessed One and sat down at one side; some pronounced their name and clan in the Blessed One’s presence and sat down at one side; some kept silent and sat down at one side.
mn82:3.2 | S: When they were seated, the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired them with a Dhamma talk. | T: When they were seated, the Blessed One instructed, urged, roused, and gladdened them with talk on the Dhamma.
mn82:4.1 | S: Now at that time a gentleman named Raṭṭhapāla, the son of the leading clan in Thullakoṭṭhika, was sitting in the assembly. | T: Now at that time a clansman named Raṭṭhapāla, the son of the leading clan in that same Thullakoṭṭhita, was sitting in the assembly.
mn82:4.2 | S: He thought, | T: Then it occurred to him:
mn82:4.3 | S: “As I understand the Buddha’s teaching, it’s not easy for someone living at home to lead the spiritual life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell. | T: “As I understand the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One, it is not easy while living in a home to lead the holy life, utterly perfect and pure as a polished shell.
mn82:4.4 | S: Why don’t I shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from lay life to homelessness?” | T: Suppose I shave off my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness.”
mn82:5.1 | S: Then, having approved and agreed with what the Buddha said, the brahmins and householders of Thullakoṭṭhika got up from their seat, bowed and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on their right, before leaving. | T: Then the brahmin householders of Thullakoṭṭhita, having been instructed, urged, roused, and gladdened by the Blessed One with talk on the Dhamma, delighted and rejoiced in his words. They then rose from their seats, and after paying homage to him, they departed, keeping him on their right.
mn82:6.1 | S: Soon after they left, Raṭṭhapāla went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, | T: Soon after they had gone, the clansman Raṭṭhapāla went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and said to the Blessed One:
mn82:6.2 | S: “Sir, as I understand the Buddha’s teaching, it’s not easy for someone living at home to lead the spiritual life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell. | T: “Venerable sir, as I understand the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One, it is not easy while living in a home to lead the holy life, utterly perfect and pure as a polished shell.
mn82:6.3 | S: I wish to shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness. | T: Venerable sir, I wish to shave off my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness.
mn82:6.4 | S: Sir, may I receive the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha’s presence? | T: I would receive the going forth under the Blessed One, I would receive the full admission.”
mn82:6.5 | S: May the Buddha please give me the going forth!” | T: (none)
mn82:6.6 | S: “But, Raṭṭhapāla, do you have your parents’ permission?” | T: “Have you been permitted by your parents, Raṭṭhapāla, to go forth from the home life into homelessness?”
mn82:6.7 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “No, venerable sir, I have not been permitted by my parents.”
mn82:6.8 | S: “Raṭṭhapāla, Buddhas don’t give the going forth to the child of parents who haven’t given their permission.” | T: “Raṭṭhapāla, Tathāgatas do not give the going forth to anyone who does not have his parents’ permission.”
mn82:6.9 | S: “I’ll make sure, sir, to get my parents’ permission.” | T: “Venerable sir, I shall see to it that my parents permit me to go forth from the home life into homelessness.”
mn82:7.1 | S: Then Raṭṭhapāla rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha. Then he went to his parents and said, | T: Then the clansman Raṭṭhapāla rose from his seat, and after paying homage to the Blessed One, he departed, keeping him on his right. He went to his parents and told them:
mn82:7.2 | S: “Mum and dad, as I understand the Buddha’s teachings, it’s not easy for someone living at home to lead the spiritual life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell. | T: “Mother and father, as I understand the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One, it is not easy while living in a home to lead the holy life, utterly perfect and pure as a polished shell.
mn82:7.3 | S: I wish to shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness. | T: I wish to shave off my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness.
mn82:7.4 | S: Please give me permission to go forth.” | T: Give me permission to go forth from the home life into homelessness.”
mn82:7.5 | S: When he said this, Raṭṭhapāla’s parents said to him, | T: When he had said this, his parents replied:
mn82:7.6 | S: “But, dear Raṭṭhapāla, you’re our only child. You’re dear to us and we love you. You’re pampered and raised in comfort. | T: “Dear Raṭṭhapāla, you are our only son, dear and beloved. You have been raised in comfort, brought up in comfort;
mn82:7.7 | S: You know nothing of suffering. | T: you know nothing of suffering, dear Raṭṭhapāla.
mn82:7.8 | S: Even when you die we will lose you against our wishes. | T: Even in case of your death we would lose you unwillingly,
mn82:7.9 | S: So how can we allow you to go forth while you’re still alive?” | T: so how could we give you our permission to go forth from the home life into homelessness while you are still living?”
mn82:7.10 | S: For a second time … | T: For the second time…For the third time the clansman Raṭṭhapāla said to his parents:
mn82:7.11 | S: For a third time, Raṭṭhapāla asked his parents for permission, but got the same reply. | T: “Mother and father…give me permission to go forth from the home life into homelessness.” For the third time his parents replied: “Dear Raṭṭhapāla…how could we give you our permission to go forth from the home life into homelessness while you are still living?”
mn82:7.20 | S: Then Raṭṭhapāla thought, | T: Then, not receiving his parents’ permission to go forth,
mn82:7.21 | S: “My parents don’t allow me to go forth.” He laid down right there on the bare ground, saying, | T: the clansman Raṭṭhapāla lay down there on the bare floor, saying:
mn82:7.22 | S: “I’ll either die right here or go forth.” | T: “Right here I shall either die or receive the going forth.”
mn82:7.23 | S: And he refused to eat, up to the seventh meal. | T: (none)
mn82:8.1 | S: Then Raṭṭhapāla’s parents said to him, | T: Then the clansman Raṭṭhapāla’s parents said to him:
mn82:8.2 | S: “Dear Raṭṭhapāla, you’re our only child. You’re dear to us and we love you. You’re pampered and raised in comfort. | T: “Dear Raṭṭhapāla, you are our only son, dear and beloved. You have been raised in comfort, brought up in comfort;
mn82:8.3 | S: You know nothing of suffering. | T: you know nothing of suffering, dear Raṭṭhapāla.
mn82:8.4 | S: When you die we will lose you against our wishes. | T: (none)
mn82:8.5 | S: So how can we allow you to go forth from lay life to homelessness while you’re still living? | T: (none)
mn82:8.6 | S: Get up, Raṭṭhapāla! Eat, drink, and amuse yourself. | T: Get up, dear Raṭṭhapāla, eat, drink, and amuse yourself. While eating, drinking, and amusing yourself,
mn82:8.7 | S: While enjoying sensual pleasures, delight in making merit. | T: you can be happy enjoying sensual pleasures and making merit.
mn82:8.8 | S: We don’t allow you to go forth. | T: We do not permit you to go forth from the home life into homelessness.
mn82:8.9 | S: When you die we will lose you against our wishes. | T: Even in the case of your death we would lose you unwillingly,
mn82:8.10 | S: So how can we allow you to go forth while you’re still alive?” | T: so how could we give you our permission to go forth from the home life into homelessness while you are still living?”
mn82:8.11 | S: When they said this, Raṭṭhapāla kept silent. | T: When this was said, the clansman Raṭṭhapāla was silent.
mn82:8.12 | S: For a second time, | T: For the second time…For the third time his parents said to him:
mn82:8.14 | S: and a third time, Raṭṭhapāla’s parents made the same request. | T: (none)
mn82:8.17 | P: Maraṇenapi te mayaṁ akāmakā vinā bhavissāma, kiṁ pana mayaṁ taṁ jīvantaṁ anujānissāma agārasmā anagāriyaṁ pabbajjāya. | T: “Dear Raṭṭhapāla…how could we give you our permission to go forth from the home life into homelessness while you are still living?”
mn82:9.1 | S: And for a third time, Raṭṭhapāla kept silent. Raṭṭhapāla’s parents then went to see his friends. They told them of the situation and asked for their help. | T: For the third time the clansman Raṭṭhapāla was silent. Then the clansman Raṭṭhapāla’s parents went to his friends and said to them: “Dears, the clansman Raṭṭhapāla has lain down on the bare floor, having said: ‘Right here I shall either die or receive the going forth.’ Come, dears, go to the clansman Raṭṭhapāla and say to him: ‘Friend Raṭṭhapāla, you are your parents’ only son…Get up, friend Raṭṭhapāla, eat, drink, and amuse yourself… how could your parents give you their permission to go forth from the home life into homelessness while you are still living?’”
mn82:10.1 | S: Then Raṭṭhapāla’s friends went to him and said, | T: Then the clansman Raṭṭhapāla’s friends went to him and said:
mn82:10.2 | S: “Our dear Raṭṭhapāla, you are your parents’ only child. You’re dear to them and they love you. You’re pampered and raised in comfort. | T: “Friend Raṭṭhapāla, you are your parents’ only son, dear and beloved. You have been raised in comfort, brought up in comfort;
mn82:10.3 | S: You know nothing of suffering. | T: you know nothing of suffering, friend Raṭṭhapāla.
mn82:10.4 | S: When you die your parents will lose you against their wishes. | T: (none)
mn82:10.5 | S: So how can they allow you to go forth while you’re still alive? | T: (none)
mn82:10.6 | S: Get up, Raṭṭhapāla! Eat, drink, and amuse yourself. | T: Get up, friend Raṭṭhapāla, eat, drink, and amuse yourself. While eating, drinking, and amusing yourself,
mn82:10.7 | S: While enjoying sensual pleasures, delight in making merit. | T: you can be happy enjoying sensual pleasures and making merit.
mn82:10.8 | S: Your parents will not allow you to go forth. | T: Your parents do not permit you to go forth from the home life into homelessness.
mn82:10.9 | S: Even when you die your parents will lose you against their wishes. | T: Even in case of your death they would lose you unwillingly,
mn82:10.10 | S: So how can they allow you to go forth while you’re still alive?” | T: so how could they give you their permission to go forth from the home life into homelessness while you are still living?”
mn82:10.11 | S: When they said this, Raṭṭhapāla kept silent. | T: When this was said, the clansman Raṭṭhapāla was silent.
mn82:10.12 | S: For a second time … | T: For the second time…For the third time his friends said to him:
mn82:10.13 | S: For a third time, Raṭṭhapāla’s friends made the same request. | T: (none)
mn82:10.15 | P: Kiṁ pana te taṁ jīvantaṁ anujānissanti agārasmā anagāriyaṁ pabbajjāya? | T: “Friend Raṭṭhapāla…how could they give you their permission to go forth from the home life into homelessness while you are still living?”
mn82:10.19 | S: And for a third time, Raṭṭhapāla kept silent. | T: For the third time the clansman Raṭṭhapāla was silent.
mn82:11.1 | S: Then Raṭṭhapāla’s friends went to his parents and said, | T: Then the clansman Raṭṭhapāla’s friends went to his parents and said to them:
mn82:11.2 | S: “Mum and dad, Raṭṭhapāla is lying there on the bare ground saying: | T: “Mother and father, the clansman Raṭṭhapāla is lying down there on the bare floor, having said:
mn82:11.3 | S: ‘I’ll either die right here or go forth.’ | T: ‘Right here I shall either die or receive the going forth.’
mn82:11.4 | S: If you don’t allow him to go forth, he’ll die there. | T: Now if you do not give him your permission to go forth from the home life into homelessness, he will die there.
mn82:11.5 | S: But if you do allow him to go forth, you’ll see him again afterwards. | T: But if you give him your permission, you will see him after he has gone forth.
mn82:11.6 | S: And if he doesn’t enjoy the renunciate life, where else will he have to go? He’ll come right back here. | T: And if he does not enjoy the going forth, what else can he do then but return here?
mn82:11.7 | S: Please give Raṭṭhapāla permission to go forth.” | T: So give him your permission to go forth from the home life into homelessness.”
mn82:11.8 | S: “Then, dears, we give Raṭṭhapāla permission to go forth. | T: “Then, dears, we give the clansman Raṭṭhapāla permission to go forth from the home life into homelessness.
mn82:11.9 | S: But once gone forth he must visit his parents.” | T: But when he has gone forth, he must visit his parents.”
mn82:11.10 | S: Then Raṭṭhapāla’s friends went to him and said, | T: Then the clansman Raṭṭhapāla’s friends went to him and told him:
mn82:11.11 | S: “Get up, Raṭṭhapāla! Your parents have given you permission to go forth from lay life to homelessness. | T: “Get up, friend Raṭṭhapāla. Your parents permit you to go forth from the home life into homelessness.
mn82:11.12 | S: But once gone forth you must visit your parents.” | T: But when you have gone forth, you must visit your parents.”
mn82:12.1 | S: Raṭṭhapāla got up and regained his strength. He went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, | T: The clansman Raṭṭhapāla then got up, and when he had regained his strength, he went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and told him:
mn82:12.2 | S: “Sir, I have my parents’ permission to go forth from the lay life to homelessness. | T: “Venerable sir, I have my parents’ permission to go forth from the home life into homelessness.
mn82:12.3 | S: May the Buddha please give me the going forth.” | T: Let the Blessed One give me the going forth.”
mn82:13.1 | S: And Raṭṭhapāla received the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha’s presence. | T: Then the clansman Raṭṭhapāla received the going forth under the Blessed One, and he received the full admission.
mn82:13.2 | S: Not long after Venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s ordination, a fortnight later, the Buddha—having stayed in Thullakoṭṭhika as long as he pleased—set out for Sāvatthī. | T: Then not long after the venerable Raṭṭhapāla had received the full admission, a half-month after he had received the full admission, the Blessed One, having stayed at Thullakoṭṭhita as long as he chose, set out to wander towards Sāvatthī.
mn82:13.3 | S: Traveling stage by stage, he arrived at Sāvatthī, | T: Wandering by stages, he eventually arrived at Sāvatthī,
mn82:13.4 | S: where he stayed in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. | T: and there he lived at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
mn82:14.1 | S: Then Venerable Raṭṭhapāla, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness. | T: Before long, dwelling alone, withdrawn, diligent, ardent, and resolute, the venerable Raṭṭhapāla, by realising for himself with direct knowledge, here and now entered upon and abided in that supreme goal of the holy life for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from the home life into homelessness.
mn82:14.2 | S: He understood: “Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further for this place.” | T: He directly knew: “Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.”
mn82:14.3 | S: And Venerable Raṭṭhapāla became one of the perfected. | T: And the venerable Raṭṭhapāla became one of the arahants.
mn82:15.1 | S: Then he went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, | T: Then the venerable Raṭṭhapāla went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and told him:
mn82:15.2 | S: “Sir, I would like to visit my parents, if the Buddha allows it.” | T: “Venerable sir, I wish to visit my parents, if I have the Blessed One’s permission.”
mn82:15.3 | S: Then the Buddha focused on encompassing Raṭṭhapāla’s mind. | T: Then the Blessed One penetrated mentally the thoughts in venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s mind.
mn82:15.4 | S: When he knew that | T: When he knew that the clansman Raṭṭhapāla was incapable of abandoning the training and returning to the low life,
mn82:15.5 | S: it was impossible for Raṭṭhapāla to resign the training and return to a lesser life, he said, | T: (none)
mn82:15.6 | S: “Please, Raṭṭhapāla, go at your convenience.” | T: he told him: “You may go, Raṭṭhapāla, at your own convenience.”
mn82:16.1 | S: And then Raṭṭhapāla rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right. Then he set his lodgings in order and, taking his bowl and robe, set out for Thullakoṭṭhika. | T: Then the venerable Raṭṭhapāla rose from his seat, and after paying homage to the Blessed One, he departed, keeping him on his right. He then set his resting place in order, and taking his bowl and outer robe, set out to wander towards Thullakoṭṭhita.
mn82:16.2 | S: Traveling stage by stage, he arrived at Thullakoṭṭhika, | T: Wandering by stages, he eventually arrived at Thullakoṭṭhita.
mn82:16.3 | S: where he stayed in King Koravya’s deer range. | T: There he lived in Thullakoṭṭhita in King Koravya’s Migācīra Garden.
mn82:16.4 | S: Then Raṭṭhapāla robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Thullakoṭṭhika for alms. | T: Then, when it was morning, he dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Thullakoṭṭhita for alms.
mn82:16.5 | S: Wandering indiscriminately for almsfood, he approached his own father’s house. | T: As he was wandering for alms from house to house in Thullakoṭṭhita, he came to his own father’s house.
mn82:17.1 | S: Now at that time Raṭṭhapāla’s father was having his hair dressed in the hall of the middle gate. | T: Now on that occasion the venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s father was sitting in the hall of the central door having his hair dressed.
mn82:17.2 | S: He saw Raṭṭhapāla coming off in the distance | T: When he saw the venerable Raṭṭhapāla coming in the distance,
mn82:17.3 | S: and said, | T: he said:
mn82:17.4 | S: “Our dear and beloved only son was made to go forth by these shavelings, these fake ascetics!” | T: “Our only son, dear and beloved, was made to go forth by these bald-pated recluses.”
mn82:17.5 | S: And at his own father’s home Raṭṭhapāla received neither alms nor a polite refusal, | T: Then at his own father’s house the venerable Raṭṭhapāla received neither alms nor a polite refusal;
mn82:17.6 | S: but only abuse. | T: instead, he received only abuse.
mn82:18.1 | S: Now at that time a family bondservant wanted to throw away the previous night’s porridge. | T: Just then a slavewoman belonging to one of his relatives was about to throw away some old porridge.
mn82:18.2 | S: So Raṭṭhapāla said to her, | T: Seeing this, the venerable Raṭṭhapāla said to her:
mn82:18.3 | S: “If that’s to be thrown away, sister, pour it here in my bowl.” | T: “Sister, if that stuff is to be thrown away, then pour it into my bowl here.”
mn82:18.4 | S: As she was pouring the porridge into his bowl, she recognized the features of his hands, feet, and voice. | T: While she was doing so, she recognised the characteristic features of his hands, his feet, and his voice.
mn82:18.5 | S: She then went to his mother and said, | T: Then she went to his mother and said:
mn82:18.6 | S: “Please, madam, you should know this. | T: “Please know, my lady,
mn82:18.7 | S: Master Raṭṭhapāla has arrived.” | T: that my lord’s son Raṭṭhapāla has arrived.”
mn82:18.8 | S: “If you speak the truth, wench, I’ll make you a free woman!” | T: “Gracious! If what you say is true, you are no longer a slave!”
mn82:18.9 | S: Then Raṭṭhapāla’s mother went to his father and said, | T: Then the venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s mother went to his father and said:
mn82:18.10 | S: “Please householder, you should know this. | T: “Please know, householder,
mn82:18.11 | S: It seems our son Raṭṭhapāla has arrived.” | T: they say that the clansman Raṭṭhapāla has arrived.”
mn82:19.1 | S: Now at that time Raṭṭhapāla was eating last night’s porridge by a wall. | T: Just then the venerable Raṭṭhapāla was eating the old porridge by the wall of a certain shelter.
mn82:19.2 | S: Then Raṭṭhapāla’s father went up to him and said, | T: His father went to him and said:
mn82:19.3 | S: “Dear Raṭṭhapāla! How can you be eating last night’s porridge? | T: “Raṭṭhapāla, my dear, surely there is…and you will be eating old porridge!
mn82:19.4 | S: Why not go to your own home?” | T: Is there not your own house to go to?”
mn82:19.5 | S: “Householder, how could those of us who have gone forth from the lay life to homelessness have a house? | T: “How could we have a house, householder, when we have gone forth from the home life into homelessness?
mn82:19.6 | S: We are homeless, householder. | T: We are homeless, householder.
mn82:19.7 | S: I came to your house, but there I received neither alms nor a polite refusal, | T: We went to your house, but we received neither alms nor a polite refusal there;
mn82:19.8 | S: but only abuse.” | T: instead we received only abuse.”
mn82:19.9 | S: “Come, dear Raṭṭhapāla, let’s go to the house.” | T: “Come, dear Raṭṭhapāla, let us go to the house.”
mn82:19.10 | S: “Enough, householder. My meal is finished for today.” | T: “Enough, householder, my meal for today is finished.”
mn82:19.11 | S: “Well then, dear Raṭṭhapāla, please accept tomorrow’s meal from me.” | T: “Then, dear Raṭṭhapāla, consent to accept tomorrow’s meal.”
mn82:19.12 | S: Raṭṭhapāla consented with silence. | T: The venerable Raṭṭhapāla consented in silence.
mn82:20.1 | S: Then, knowing that Raṭṭhapāla had consented, his father went back to his own house. He made a heap of gold, both coined and uncoined, and hid it under mats. Then he addressed Raṭṭhapāla’s former wives, | T: Then, knowing that the venerable Raṭṭhapāla had consented, his father went back to his own house where he had gold coins and bullion made into a large heap and covered it with mats. Then he told the venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s former wives:
mn82:20.2 | S: “Please, daughters-in-law, adorn yourselves in the way that our son Raṭṭhapāla found you most adorable.” | T: “Come, daughters-in-law, adorn yourselves with ornaments in the way Raṭṭhapāla found you most dear and loveable.”
mn82:21.1 | S: And when the night had passed Raṭṭhapāla’s father had delicious fresh and cooked foods prepared in his own home, and announced the time to the Venerable Raṭṭhapāla, saying, | T: When night had ended, the venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s father had good food of various kinds prepared in his own house and had the time announced to the venerable Raṭṭhapāla:
