## dn2, continued
dn2:56.3 | S: They refrain from such low lore, such wrong livelihood. | T: he abstains from such wrong means of livelihood, from such debased arts.
dn2:56.4 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: This too pertains to his moral discipline.
dn2:57.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: “Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, earn their living by a wrong means of livelihood,
dn2:57.2 | S: This includes reading the marks of gems, cloth, clubs, swords, spears, arrows, bows, weapons, women, men, boys, girls, male and female bondservants, elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, cows, goats, rams, chickens, quails, monitor lizards, rabbits, tortoises, or deer. | T: by such debased arts as interpreting the significance of the colour, shape, and other features of the following items to determine whether they portend fortune or misfortune for their owners: gems, garments, staffs, swords, spears, arrows, bows, other weapons, women, men, boys, girls, slaves, slave-women, elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, cows, goats, rams, fowl, quails, lizards, earrings (or house-gables), tortoises, and other animals—
dn2:57.3 | S: They refrain from such low lore, such wrong livelihood. | T: he abstains from such wrong means of livelihood, from such debased arts.
dn2:57.4 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: This too pertains to his moral discipline.
dn2:58.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: “Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, earn their living by a wrong means of livelihood,
dn2:58.2 | S: This includes making predictions that the king will march forth or march back; or that our king will attack and the enemy king will retreat, or vice versa; or that our king will triumph and the enemy king will be defeated, or vice versa; and so there will be victory for one and defeat for the other. | T: by such debased arts as making predictions to the effect that: the king will march forth; the king will return; our king will attack and the enemy king will retreat; the enemy king will attack and our king will retreat; our king will triumph and the enemy king will be defeated; the enemy king will triumph and our king will be defeated; thus there will be victory for one and defeat for the other—
dn2:58.3 | S: They refrain from such low lore, such wrong livelihood. | T: he abstains from such wrong means of livelihood, from such debased arts.
dn2:58.4 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: This too pertains to his moral discipline.
dn2:59.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: “Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, earn their living by a wrong means of livelihood, by such debased arts as predicting:
dn2:59.2 | S: This includes making predictions that there will be an eclipse of the moon, or sun, or stars; that the sun, moon, and stars will be in conjunction or in opposition; that there will be a meteor shower, a fiery horizon, an earthquake, or thunder in the heavens; that there will be a rising, a setting, a darkening, a brightening of the moon, sun, and stars. And it also includes making predictions about the results of all such phenomena. | T: there will be an eclipse of the moon, an eclipse of the sun, an eclipse of a constellation the sun and the moon will go on their proper courses there will be an aberration of the sun and moon the constellations will go on their proper courses there will be an aberration of a constellation there will be a fall of meteors there will be a skyblaze there will be an earthquake there will be an earth-roar there will be a rising and setting, a darkening and brightening of the moon, sun, and constellations such will be the result of the moon’s eclipse, such the result of the sun’s eclipse, (and so on down to) such will be the result of the rising and setting, darkening and brightening of the moon, sun, and constellations—
dn2:59.3 | S: They refrain from such low lore, such wrong livelihood. | T: he abstains from such wrong means of livelihood, from such debased arts.
dn2:59.4 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: This too pertains to his moral discipline.
dn2:60.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: “Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, earn their living by a wrong means of livelihood, by such debased arts as predicting:
dn2:60.2 | S: This includes predicting whether there will be plenty of rain or drought; plenty to eat or famine; an abundant harvest or a bad harvest; security or peril; sickness or health. It also includes such occupations as arithmetic, accounting, calculating, poetry, and cosmology. | T: there will be abundant rain there will be a drought there will be a good harvest there will be a famine there will be security there will be danger there will be sickness there will be health or they earn their living by accounting, computation, calculation, the composing of poetry, and speculations about the world—
dn2:60.3 | S: They refrain from such low lore, such wrong livelihood. | T: he abstains from such wrong means of livelihood, from such debased arts.
dn2:60.4 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: This too pertains to his moral discipline.
dn2:61.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: “Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, earn their living by a wrong means of livelihood, by such debased arts as:
dn2:61.2 | S: This includes making arrangements for giving and taking in marriage; for engagement and divorce; and for scattering rice inwards or outwards at the wedding ceremony. It also includes casting spells for good or bad luck, treating impacted fetuses, binding the tongue, or locking the jaws; charms for the hands and ears; questioning a mirror, a girl, or a god as an oracle; worshiping the sun, worshiping the Great One, breathing fire, and invoking Siri, the goddess of luck. | T: arranging auspicious dates for marriages, both those in which the bride is brought home and those in which she is sent out arranging auspicious dates for betrothals and divorces arranging auspicious dates for the accumulation or expenditure of money reciting charms to make people lucky or unlucky rejuvenating the foetuses of abortive women reciting spells to bind a man’s tongue, to paralyze his jaws, to make him lose control over his hands, or to bring on deafness obtaining oracular answers to questions by means of a mirror, a girl, or a god worshipping the sun worshipping Mahābrahmā bringing forth flames from the mouth invoking the goddess of luck—
dn2:61.3 | S: They refrain from such low lore, such wrong livelihood. | T: he abstains from such wrong means of livelihood, from such debased arts.
dn2:61.4 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: This too pertains to his moral discipline.
dn2:62.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: “Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, earn their living by a wrong means of livelihood, by such debased arts as:
dn2:62.2 | S: This includes rites for propitiation, for granting wishes, for ghosts, for the earth, for rain, for property settlement, and for preparing and consecrating house sites, and rites involving sipping water and bathing, and oblations. It also includes administering emetics, purgatives, expectorants, and phlegmagogues; administering ear-oils, eye restoratives, nasal medicine, ointments, and counter-ointments; surgery with needle and scalpel, treating children, prescribing root medicines, and herbal bandages. | T: promising gifts to deities in return for favours fulfilling such promises demonology reciting spells after entering an earthen house inducing virility and impotence preparing and consecrating sites for a house giving ceremonial mouthwashes and ceremonial bathing offering sacrificial fires administering emetics, purgatives, expectorants, and phlegmagogues administering medicines through the ear and through the nose, administering ointments and counter-ointments, practising fine surgery on the eyes and ears, practising general surgery on the body, practising as a children’s doctor—
dn2:62.3 | S: They refrain from such low lore, such wrong livelihood. | T: he abstains from such wrong means of livelihood, from such debased arts.
dn2:62.4 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: This too pertains to his moral discipline.
dn2:63.1 | S: A mendicant thus accomplished in ethics sees no danger in any quarter in regards to their ethical restraint. | T: “Great king, the bhikkhu who is thus possessed of moral discipline sees no danger anywhere in regard to his restraint by moral discipline.
dn2:63.2 | S: It’s like a king who has defeated his enemies. He sees no danger from his foes in any quarter. | T: Just as a head-anointed noble warrior who has defeated his enemies sees no danger anywhere from his enemies,
dn2:63.3 | S: In the same way, a mendicant thus accomplished in ethics sees no danger in any quarter in regards to their ethical restraint. | T: so the bhikkhu who is thus possessed of moral discipline sees no danger anywhere in regard to his restraint by moral discipline.
dn2:63.4 | S: When they have this spectrum of noble ethics, they experience a blameless happiness inside themselves. | T: Endowed with this noble aggregate of moral discipline, he experiences within himself a blameless happiness.
dn2:63.5 | S: That’s how a mendicant is accomplished in ethics. | T: In this way, great king, the bhikkhu is possessed of moral discipline.
dn2:63.6 | S: The longer section on ethics is complete. | T: (none)
dn2:64.0.1 | S: 4.3.2. Immersion | T: (none)
dn2:64.0.2 | S: 4.3.2.1. Sense Restraint | T: Restraint of the Sense Faculties
dn2:64.1 | S: And how does a mendicant guard the sense doors? | T: “And how, great king, does the bhikkhu guard the doors of his sense faculties?
dn2:64.2 | S: When a mendicant sees a sight with their eyes, they don’t get caught up in the features and details. | T: Herein, great king, having seen a form with the eye, the bhikkhu does not grasp at the sign or the details.
dn2:64.3 | S: If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint. | T: Since, if he were to dwell without restraint over the faculty of the eye, evil unwholesome states such as covetousness and grief might assail him, he practises restraint, guards the faculty of the eye, and achieves restraint over the faculty of the eye.
dn2:64.4 | S: When they hear a sound with their ears … | T: Having heard a sound with the ear …
dn2:64.5 | S: When they smell an odor with their nose … | T: having smelled an odour with the nose …
dn2:64.6 | S: When they taste a flavor with their tongue … | T: having tasted a flavour with the tongue …
dn2:64.7 | S: When they feel a touch with their body … | T: having touched a tangible object with the body …
dn2:64.8 | S: When they know an idea with their mind, they don’t get caught up in the features and details. | T: having cognized a mind-object with the mind, the bhikkhu does not grasp at the sign or the details.
dn2:64.9 | S: If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. | T: Since, if he were to dwell without restraint over the faculty of the mind, evil unwholesome states such as covetousness and grief might assail him, he practises restraint, guards the faculty of the mind, and achieves restraint over the faculty of the mind.
dn2:64.10 | S: When they have this noble sense restraint, they experience an unsullied bliss inside themselves. | T: Endowed with this noble restraint of the sense faculties, he experiences within himself an unblemished happiness.
dn2:64.11 | S: That’s how a mendicant guards the sense doors. | T: In this way, great king, the bhikkhu guards the doors of the sense faculties.
dn2:65.0 | S: 4.3.2.2. Mindfulness and Situational Awareness | T: Mindfulness and Clear Comprehension
dn2:65.1 | S: And how does a mendicant have mindfulness and situational awareness? | T: “And how, great king, is the bhikkhu endowed with mindfulness and clear comprehension?
dn2:65.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant acts with situational awareness when going out and coming back; when looking ahead and aside; when bending and extending the limbs; when bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes; when eating, drinking, chewing, and tasting; when urinating and defecating; when walking, standing, sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping silent. | T: Herein, great king, in going forward and returning, the bhikkhu acts with clear comprehension. In looking ahead and looking aside, he acts with clear comprehension. In bending and stretching the limbs, he acts with clear comprehension. In wearing his robes and cloak and using his alms-bowl, he acts with clear comprehension. In eating, drinking, chewing, and tasting, he acts with clear comprehension. In defecating and urinating, he acts with clear comprehension. In going, standing, sitting, lying down, waking up, speaking, and remaining silent, he acts with clear comprehension.
dn2:65.3 | S: That’s how a mendicant has mindfulness and situational awareness. | T: In this way, great king, the bhikkhu is endowed with mindfulness and clear comprehension.
dn2:66.0 | S: 4.3.2.3. Contentment | T: Contentment
dn2:66.1 | S: And how is a mendicant content? | T: “And how, great king, is the bhikkhu content?
dn2:66.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant is content with robes to look after the body and almsfood to look after the belly. Wherever they go, they set out taking only these things. | T: Herein, great king, a bhikkhu is content with robes to protect his body and almsfood to sustain his belly; wherever he goes he sets out taking only (his requisites) along with him.
dn2:66.3 | S: They’re like a bird: wherever it flies, wings are its only burden. | T: Just as a bird, wherever it goes, flies with its wings as its only burden,
dn2:66.4 | S: In the same way, a mendicant is content with robes to look after the body and almsfood to look after the belly. Wherever they go, they set out taking only these things. | T: in the same way a bhikkhu is content with robes to protect his body and almsfood to sustain his belly; wherever he goes he sets out taking only (his requisites) along with him.
dn2:66.5 | S: That’s how a mendicant is content. | T: In this way, great king, the bhikkhu is content.
dn2:67.0 | S: 4.3.2.4. Giving Up the Hindrances | T: The Abandoning of the Hindrances
dn2:67.1 | S: When they have this spectrum of noble ethics, this noble sense restraint, this noble mindfulness and situational awareness, and this noble contentment, | T: “Endowed with this noble aggregate of moral discipline, this noble restraint over the sense faculties, this noble mindfulness and clear comprehension, and this noble contentment,
dn2:67.2 | S: they frequent a secluded lodging—a wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw. | T: he resorts to a secluded dwelling—a forest, the foot of a tree, a mountain, a glen, a hillside cave, a cremation ground, a jungle grove, the open air, a heap of straw.
dn2:67.3 | S: After the meal, they return from almsround, sit down cross-legged, set their body straight, and bring mindfulness to the present. | T: After returning from his alms-round, following his meals, he sits down, crosses his legs, holds his body erect, and sets up mindfulness before him.
dn2:68.1 | S: Giving up covetousness for the world, they meditate with a heart rid of covetousness, cleansing the mind of covetousness. | T: “Having abandoned covetousness for the world, he dwells with a mind free from covetousness; he purifies his mind from covetousness.
dn2:68.2 | S: Giving up ill will and malevolence, they meditate with a mind rid of ill will, full of sympathy for all living beings, cleansing the mind of ill will. | T: Having abandoned ill will and hatred, he dwells with a benevolent mind, sympathetic for the welfare of all living beings; he purifies his mind from ill will and hatred.
dn2:68.3 | S: Giving up dullness and drowsiness, they meditate with a mind rid of dullness and drowsiness, perceiving light, mindful and aware, cleansing the mind of dullness and drowsiness. | T: Having abandoned dullness and drowsiness, he dwells perceiving light, mindful and clearly comprehending; he purifies his mind from dullness and drowsiness.
dn2:68.4 | S: Giving up restlessness and remorse, they meditate without restlessness, their mind settled internally, cleansing the mind of restlessness and remorse. | T: Having abandoned restlessness and worry, he dwells at ease within himself, with a peaceful mind; he purifies his mind from restlessness and worry.
dn2:68.5 | S: Giving up doubt, they meditate having gone beyond doubt, not undecided about skillful qualities, cleansing the mind of doubt. | T: Having abandoned doubt, he dwells as one who has passed beyond doubt, unperplexed about wholesome states; he purifies his mind from doubt.
dn2:69.1 | S: Suppose a man who has gotten into debt were to apply himself to work, | T: “Great king, suppose a man were to take a loan and apply it to his business,
dn2:69.2 | S: and his efforts proved successful. | T: and his business were to succeed,
dn2:69.3 | S: He would pay off the original loan and have enough left over to support his partner. | T: so that he could pay back his old debts and would have enough money left over to maintain a wife.
dn2:69.4 | S: Thinking about this, | T: He would reflect on this,
dn2:69.8 | S: he’d be filled with joy and happiness. | T: and as a result he would become glad and experience joy.
dn2:70.1 | S: Suppose there was a person who was sick, suffering, gravely ill. They’d lose their appetite and get physically weak. | T: “Again, great king, suppose a man were to become sick, afflicted, gravely ill,
dn2:70.2 | S: But after some time they’d recover from that illness, and regain their appetite and their strength. | T: so that he could not enjoy his food and his strength would decline. After some time he would recover from that illness and would enjoy his food and regain his bodily strength.
dn2:70.3 | S: Thinking about this, | T: He would reflect on this,
dn2:70.8 | S: they’d be filled with joy and happiness. | T: and as a result he would become glad and experience joy.
dn2:71.1 | S: Suppose a person was imprisoned in a jail. | T: “Again, great king, suppose a man were locked up in a prison.
dn2:71.2 | S: But after some time they were released from jail, safe and sound, with no loss of wealth. | T: After some time he would be released from prison, safe and secure, with no loss of his possessions.
dn2:71.3 | S: Thinking about this, | T: He would reflect on this,
dn2:71.6 | S: they’d be filled with joy and happiness. | T: and as a result he would become glad and experience joy.
dn2:72.1 | S: Suppose a person was a bondservant. They would not be their own master, but indentured to another, unable to go where they wish. | T: “Again, great king, suppose a man were a slave, without independence, subservient to others, unable to go where he wants.
dn2:72.2 | S: But after some time they’d be freed from servitude. They would be their own master, not indentured to another, a freeman able to go where they wish. | T: After some time he would be released from slavery and gain his independence; he would no longer be subservient to others but a free man able to go where he wants.
dn2:72.3 | S: Thinking about this, | T: He would reflect on this,
dn2:72.6 | S: they’d be filled with joy and happiness. | T: and as a result he would become glad and experience joy.
dn2:73.1 | S: Suppose there was a person with wealth and property who was traveling along a desert road, which was perilous, with nothing to eat. | T: “Again, great king, suppose a man with wealth and possessions were travelling along a desert road where food was scarce and dangers were many.
dn2:73.2 | S: But after some time they crossed over the desert safely, arriving within a village, a sanctuary free of peril. | T: After some time he would cross over the desert and arrive safely at a village which is safe and free from danger.
dn2:73.3 | S: Thinking about this, | T: He would reflect on this,
dn2:73.6 | S: they’d be filled with joy and happiness. | T: and as a result he would become glad and experience joy.
dn2:74.1 | S: In the same way, as long as these five hindrances are not given up inside themselves, a mendicant regards them as a debt, a disease, a prison, slavery, and a desert crossing. | T: “In the same way, great king, when a bhikkhu sees that these five hindrances are unabandoned within himself, he regards that as a debt, as a sickness, as confinement in prison, as slavery, as a desert road.
dn2:74.2 | S: But when these five hindrances are given up inside themselves, a mendicant regards this as freedom from debt, good health, release from prison, emancipation, and a place of sanctuary at last. | T: “But when he sees that these five hindrances have been abandoned within himself, he regards that as freedom from debt, as good health, as release from prison, as freedom from slavery, as a place of safety.
dn2:74.4 | S: Seeing that the hindrances have been given up in them, joy springs up. Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, they feel bliss. And when blissful, the mind becomes immersed. | T: “When he sees that these five hindrances have been abandoned within himself, gladness arises. When he is gladdened, rapture arises. When his mind is filled with rapture, his body becomes tranquil; tranquil in body, he experiences happiness; being happy, his mind becomes concentrated.
dn2:75.0 | S: 4.3.2.5. First Absorption | T: The First Jhāna
dn2:75.1 | S: Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: “Quite secluded from sense pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, he enters and dwells in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought and filled with the rapture and happiness born of seclusion.
dn2:75.2 | S: They drench, steep, fill, and spread themselves with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. | T: He drenches, steeps, saturates, and suffuses his body with this rapture and happiness born of seclusion, so that there is no part of his entire body which is not suffused by this rapture and happiness.
dn2:76.1 | S: It’s like when a deft bathroom attendant or their apprentice pours bath powder into a bronze dish, sprinkling it little by little with water. They knead it until the ball of bath powder is soaked and saturated with moisture, spread through inside and out; yet no moisture oozes out. | T: “Great king, suppose a skilled bath attendant or his apprentice were to pour soap-powder into a metal basin, sprinkle it with water, and knead it into a ball, so that the ball of soap-powder be pervaded by moisture, encompassed by moisture, suffused with moisture inside and out, yet would not trickle.
dn2:76.2 | S: In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads themselves with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. | T: In the same way, great king, the bhikkhu drenches, steeps, saturates, and suffuses his body with the rapture and happiness born of seclusion, so that there is no part of his entire body which is not suffused by this rapture and happiness.
dn2:76.3 | S: This, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This, great king, is a visible fruit of recluseship more excellent and sublime than the previous ones.
dn2:77.0 | S: 4.3.2.6. Second Absorption | T: The Second Jhāna
dn2:77.1 | S: Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: “Further, great king, with the subsiding of applied and sustained thought, the bhikkhu enters and dwells in the second jhāna, which is accompanied by internal confidence and unification of mind, is without applied and sustained thought, and is filled with the rapture and happiness born of concentration.
dn2:77.2 | S: They drench, steep, fill, and spread themselves with rapture and bliss born of immersion. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with rapture and bliss born of immersion. | T: He drenches, steeps, saturates, and suffuses his body with this rapture and happiness born of concentration, so that there is no part of his entire body which is not suffused by this rapture and happiness.
dn2:78.1 | S: It’s like a deep lake fed by spring water. There’s no inlet to the east, west, north, or south, and the heavens would not properly bestow showers from time to time. | T: “Great king, suppose there were a deep lake whose waters welled up from below. It would have no inlet for water from the east, west, north, or south, nor would it be refilled from time to time with showers of rain;
dn2:78.2 | S: But the stream of cool water welling up in the lake drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads throughout the lake. There’s no part of the lake that’s not spread through with cool water. | T: yet a current of cool water, welling up from within the lake, would drench, steep, saturate and suffuse the whole lake, so that there would be no part of that entire lake which is not suffused with the cool water.
dn2:78.3 | S: In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads themselves with rapture and bliss born of immersion. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with rapture and bliss born of immersion. | T: In the same way, great king, the bhikkhu drenches, steeps, saturates, and suffuses his body with the rapture and happiness born of concentration, so that there is no part of his entire body which is not suffused by this rapture and happiness.
dn2:78.4 | S: This too, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This too, great king, is a visible fruit of recluseship more excellent and sublime than the previous ones.
dn2:79.0 | S: 4.3.2.7. Third Absorption | T: The Third Jhāna
dn2:79.1 | S: Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and remains in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, experiencing for themselves the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’ | T: “Further, great king, with the fading away of rapture, the bhikkhu dwells in equanimity, mindful and clearly comprehending, and experiences happiness with the body. Thus he enters and dwells in the third jhāna, of which the noble ones declare: ‘He dwells happily with equanimity and mindfulness.’
dn2:79.2 | S: They drench, steep, fill, and spread themselves with bliss free of rapture. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with bliss free of rapture. | T: He drenches, steeps, saturates, and suffuses his body with this happiness free from rapture, so that there is no part of his entire body which is not suffused by this happiness.
dn2:80.1 | S: It’s like a pool with blue water lilies, or pink or white lotuses. Some of them sprout and grow in the water without rising above it, thriving underwater. From the tip to the root they’re drenched, steeped, filled, and soaked with cool water. There’s no part of them that’s not soaked with cool water. | T: “Great king, suppose in a lotus pond there were blue, white, or red lotuses that have been born in the water, grow in the water, and never rise up above the water, but flourish immersed in the water. From their tips to their roots they would be drenched, steeped, saturated, and suffused with cool water, so that there would be no part of those lotuses not suffused with cool water.
dn2:80.2 | S: In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads themselves with bliss free of rapture. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with bliss free of rapture. | T: In the same way, great king, the bhikkhu drenches, steeps, saturates and suffuses his body with the happiness free from rapture, so that there is no part of his entire body which is not suffused by this happiness.
dn2:80.3 | S: This too, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This too, great king, is a visible fruit of recluseship more excellent and sublime than the previous ones.
dn2:81.0 | S: 4.3.2.8. Fourth Absorption | T: The Fourth Jhāna
dn2:81.1 | S: Furthermore, with the giving up of pleasure and pain and the disappearance of former happiness and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. | T: “Further, great king, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous passing away of joy and grief, the bhikkhu enters and dwells in the fourth jhāna, which is neither pleasant nor painful and contains mindfulness fully purified by equanimity.
dn2:81.2 | S: They sit spreading their body through with pure bright mind. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with pure bright mind. | T: He sits suffusing his body with a pure bright mind, so that there is no part of his entire body not suffused by a pure bright mind.
dn2:82.1 | S: It’s like someone sitting wrapped from head to foot with white cloth. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread over with white cloth. | T: “Great king, suppose a man were to be sitting covered from the head down by a white cloth, so that there would be no part of his entire body not suffused by the white cloth.
dn2:82.2 | S: In the same way, they sit spreading their body through with pure bright mind. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with pure bright mind. | T: In the same way, great king, the bhikkhu sits suffusing his body with a pure bright mind, so that there is no part of his entire body not suffused by a pure bright mind.
dn2:82.3 | S: This too, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This too, great king, is a visible fruit of recluseship more excellent and sublime than the previous ones.
dn2:83.0.1 | S: 4.3.3. The Eight Knowledges | T: (none)
dn2:83.0.2 | S: 4.3.3.1. Knowledge and Vision | T: Insight Knowledge
dn2:83.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward knowledge and vision. | T: “When his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright, unblemished, free from defects, malleable, wieldy, steady and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to knowledge and vision.
dn2:83.2 | S: They understand: | T: He understands thus:
dn2:83.3 | S: ‘This body of mine is formed. It’s made up of the four principal states, produced by mother and father, built up from rice and porridge, liable to impermanence, to wearing away and erosion, to breaking up and destruction. | T: ‘This is my body, having material form, composed of the four primary elements, originating from father and mother, built up out of rice and gruel, impermanent, subject to rubbing and pressing, to dissolution and dispersion.
dn2:83.4 | S: And this consciousness of mine is attached to it, tied to it.’ | T: And this is my consciousness, supported by it and bound up with it.’
dn2:84.1 | S: Suppose there was a beryl gem that was naturally lustrous, eight-faceted, well-worked, transparent, clear, and unclouded, endowed with all good qualities. | T: “Great king, suppose there were a beautiful beryl gem of purest water, eight-faceted, well cut, clear, limpid, flawless, endowed with all excellent qualities.
dn2:84.2 | S: And it was strung with a thread of blue, yellow, red, white, or golden brown. | T: And through it there would run a blue, yellow, red, white, or brown thread.
dn2:84.3 | S: And a person with clear eyes were to take it in their hand and examine it: | T: A man with keen sight, taking it in his hand, would reflect upon it thus:
dn2:84.4 | S: ‘This beryl gem is naturally lustrous, eight-faceted, well-worked, transparent, clear, and unclouded, endowed with all good qualities. | T: ‘This is a beautiful beryl gem of purest water, eight faceted, well cut, clear, limpid, flawless, endowed with all excellent qualities.
dn2:84.5 | S: And it’s strung with a thread of blue, yellow, red, white, or golden brown.’ | T: And running through it there is this blue, yellow, red, white, or brown thread.’
dn2:84.6 | S: In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward knowledge and vision. | T: In the same way, great king, when his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright … the bhikkhu directs and inclines it to knowledge and vision and understands thus:
dn2:84.8 | P: ‘ayaṁ kho me kāyo rūpī cātumahābhūtiko mātāpettikasambhavo odanakummāsūpacayo aniccucchādanaparimaddanabhedanaviddhaṁsanadhammo; | T: ‘This is my body, having material form ….
dn2:84.9 | P: idañca pana me viññāṇaṁ ettha sitaṁ ettha paṭibaddhan’ti. | T: and this is my consciousness, supported by it and bound up with it.’
dn2:84.10 | S: This too, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This, too, great king, is a visible fruit of recluseship more excellent and sublime than the previous ones.
dn2:85.0 | S: 4.3.3.2. Mind-Made Body | T: The Knowledge of the Mind-made Body
dn2:85.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward the creation of a mind-made body. | T: “When his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright, unblemished, free from defects, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to creating a mind-made body.
dn2:85.2 | S: From this body they create another body—formed, mind-made, whole in its major and minor limbs, not deficient in any faculty. | T: From this body he creates another body having material form, mind-made, complete in all its parts, not lacking any faculties.
dn2:86.1 | S: Suppose a person was to draw a reed out from its sheath. | T: “Great king, suppose a man were to draw out a reed from its sheath.
dn2:86.2 | S: They’d think: | T: He would think:
dn2:86.3 | S: ‘This is the reed, this is the sheath. The reed and the sheath are different things. The reed has been drawn out from the sheath.’ | T: ‘This is the reed; this is the sheath. The reed is one thing, the sheath another, but the reed has been drawn out from the sheath.’
dn2:86.4 | S: Or suppose a person was to draw a sword out from its scabbard. | T: Or suppose a man were to draw a sword out from its scabbard.
dn2:86.5 | S: They’d think: | T: He would think:
dn2:86.6 | S: ‘This is the sword, this is the scabbard. The sword and the scabbard are different things. The sword has been drawn out from the scabbard.’ | T: ‘This is the sword; this is the scabbard. The sword is one thing, the scabbard another, but the sword has been drawn out from the scabbard.’
dn2:86.7 | S: Or suppose a person was to draw a snake out from its slough. | T: Or suppose a man were to pull a snake out from its slough.
dn2:86.8 | S: They’d think: | T: He would think:
dn2:86.9 | S: ‘This is the snake, this is the slough. The snake and the slough are different things. The snake has been drawn out from the slough.’ | T: ‘This is the snake; this is the slough. The snake is one thing, the slough another, but the snake has been pulled out from the slough.’
dn2:86.10 | S: In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward the creation of a mind-made body. | T: In the same way, great king, when his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright … The bhikkhu directs and inclines it to creating a mind-made body.
dn2:86.11 | S: From this body they create another body—formed, mind-made, whole in its major and minor limbs, not deficient in any faculty. | T: From this body he creates another body having material form, mind-made, complete in all its parts, not lacking any faculties.
dn2:86.12 | S: This too, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This too, great king, is a visible fruit of recluseship more excellent and sublime than the previous ones.
dn2:87.0 | S: 4.3.3.3. Psychic Powers | T: The Knowledge of the Modes of Supernormal Power
dn2:87.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward psychic power. | T: “When his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright, unblemished, free from defects, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to the modes of supernormal power.
dn2:87.2 | S: They wield the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying themselves and becoming one again; materializing and dematerializing; going unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful; controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity. | T: He exercises the various modes of supernormal power: having been one, he becomes many and having been many, he becomes one; he appears and vanishes; he goes unimpeded through walls, ramparts, and mountains as if through space; he dives in and out of the earth as if it were water; he walks on water without sinking as if it were earth; sitting cross-legged he travels through space like a winged bird; with his hand he touches and strokes the sun and the moon, so mighty and powerful; he exercises mastery over the body as far as the Brahma-world.
dn2:88.1 | S: Suppose a deft potter or their apprentice had some well-prepared clay. They could produce any kind of pot that they like. | T: “Great king, suppose a skilled potter or his apprentice were to make and fashion out of well-prepared clay whatever kind of vessel he might desire.
dn2:88.2 | S: Or suppose a deft ivory-carver or their apprentice had some well-prepared ivory. They could produce any kind of ivory item that they like. | T: Or suppose a skilled ivory-worker or his apprentice were to make and fashion out of well-prepared ivory whatever kind of ivory work he might desire.
dn2:88.3 | S: Or suppose a deft goldsmith or their apprentice had some well-prepared gold. They could produce any kind of gold item that they like. | T: Or suppose a skilled goldsmith or his apprentice were to make and fashion out of well-prepared gold whatever kind of gold work he might desire.
dn2:88.4 | S: In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward psychic power. | T: In the same way, great king, when his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright … the bhikkhu directs and inclines it to the modes of supernormal power and exercises the various modes of supernormal power.
dn2:88.6 | S: This too, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This too, great king, is a visible fruit of recluseship more excellent and sublime than the previous ones.
dn2:89.0 | S: 4.3.3.4. Clairaudience | T: The Knowledge of the Divine Ear
dn2:89.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward clairaudience. | T: “When his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright, unblemished, free from defects, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to the divine ear-element.
dn2:89.2 | S: With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, they hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far. | T: With the divine ear-element, which is purified and surpasses the human, he hears both kinds of sound, the divine and the human, those which are distant and those which are near.
dn2:90.1 | S: Suppose there was a person traveling along the road. They’d hear the sound of drums, clay drums, horns, kettledrums, and tom-toms. They’d think: ‘That’s the sound of drums,’ and ‘that’s the sound of clay drums,’ and ‘that’s the sound of horns, kettledrums, and tom-toms.’ | T: “Great king, suppose a man travelling along a highway were to hear the sounds of kettledrums, tambours, horns, cymbals and tom-toms, and would think: ‘This is the sound of kettledrums, this is the sound of tambours, this the sound of horns, cymbals and tom-toms.’
dn2:90.2 | S: In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward clairaudience. | T: In the same way, great king, when his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright … the bhikkhu directs and inclines it to the divine ear-element.
dn2:90.3 | S: With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, they hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far. | T: With the divine ear-element, which is purified and surpasses the human, he hears both kinds of sound, the divine and the human, those which are distant and those which are near.
dn2:90.4 | S: This too, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This too, great king, is a visible fruit of recluseship more excellent and sublime than the previous ones.
dn2:91.0 | S: 4.3.3.5. Encompassing the Minds of Others | T: The Knowledge Encompassing the Minds of Others
dn2:91.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward encompassing the minds of others. | T: “When his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright, unblemished, free from defects, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to the knowledge of encompassing the minds (of others).
dn2:91.2 | S: They understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having encompassed them with their own mind. | T: He understands the minds of other beings and persons, having encompassed them with his own mind.
dn2:91.3 | S: They understand mind with greed as ‘mind with greed’, | T: He understands a mind with lust as a mind with lust and a mind without lust as a mind without lust;
dn2:91.4 | S: and mind without greed as ‘mind without greed’. | T: (none)
dn2:91.5 | S: They understand mind with hate … | T: he understands a mind with hatred as a mind with hatred and a mind without hatred as a mind without hatred;
dn2:91.6 | S: mind without hate … | T: (none)
dn2:91.7 | S: mind with delusion … | T: he understands a mind with delusion as a mind with delusion and a mind without delusion as a mind without delusion;
dn2:91.8 | S: mind without delusion … | T: (none)
dn2:91.9 | S: constricted mind … | T: he understands a contracted mind as a contracted mind and a distracted mind as a distracted mind;
dn2:91.10 | S: scattered mind … | T: (none)
dn2:91.11 | S: expansive mind … | T: he understands an exalted mind as an exalted mind and an unexalted mind as an unexalted mind;
dn2:91.12 | S: unexpansive mind … | T: (none)
dn2:91.13 | S: mind that is not supreme … | T: he understands a surpassable mind as a surpassable mind and an unsurpassable mind as an unsurpassable mind;
dn2:91.14 | S: mind that is supreme … | T: (none)
dn2:91.15 | S: immersed mind … | T: he understands a concentrated mind as a concentrated mind and an unconcentrated mind as an unconcentrated mind;
dn2:91.16 | S: unimmersed mind … | T: (none)
dn2:91.17 | S: freed mind … | T: he understands a liberated mind as a liberated mind and an unliberated mind as an unliberated mind.
dn2:91.18 | S: They understand unfreed mind as ‘unfreed mind’. | T: (none)
dn2:92.1 | S: Suppose there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of adornments, and they check their own reflection in a clean bright mirror or a clear bowl of water. If they had a spot they’d know ‘I have a spot,’ and if they had no spots they’d know ‘I have no spots.’ | T: “Great king, suppose a young man or woman, fond of ornaments, examining his or her own facial reflection in a pure bright mirror or in a bowl of clear water, would know, if there were a mole, ‘It has a mole,’ and if there were no mole, ‘It has no mole.’
dn2:92.2 | S: In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward encompassing the minds of others. | T: In the same way, great king, when his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright … the bhikkhu directs and inclines it to the knowledge of encompassing the minds (of others).
dn2:92.3 | S: They understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having encompassed them with their own mind. | T: He understands the minds of other beings and persons, having encompassed them with his own mind.
dn2:92.20 | S: This too, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This too, great king, is a visible fruit of recluseship more excellent and sublime than the previous ones.
dn2:93.0 | S: 4.3.3.6. Recollection of Past Lives | T: The Knowledge of Recollecting Past Lives
dn2:93.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward recollection of past lives. | T: “When his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright, unblemished, free from defects, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to the knowledge of recollecting past lives.
dn2:93.2 | S: They recollect many kinds of past lives, that is, one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. They remember: ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ And so they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details. | T: He recollects his numerous past lives, that is, one birth, two births, three, four, or five births; ten, twenty, thirty, forty, or fifty births; a hundred births, a thousand births, a hundred thousand births; many aeons of world contraction, many aeons of world expansion, many aeons of world contraction and expansion, (recollecting): ‘There I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance; such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my span of life. Passing away from that state, I re-arose there. There too I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance; such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my span of life. Passing away from that state I re-arose here.’ Thus he recollects his numerous past lives in their modes and their details.
dn2:94.1 | S: Suppose a person was to leave their home village and go to another village. From that village they’d go to yet another village. And from that village they’d return to their home village. They’d think: ‘I went from my home village to another village. There I stood like this, sat like that, spoke like this, or kept silent like that. From that village I went to yet another village. There too I stood like this, sat like that, spoke like this, or kept silent like that. And from that village I returned to my home village.’ | T: “Great king, suppose a man were to go from his own village to another village, then from that village to still another village, and then from that village he would return to his own village. He would think to himself: ‘I went from my own village to that village. There I stood in such a way, sat in such a way, spoke in such a way, and remained silent in such a way. From that village I went to still another village. There too I stood in such a way, sat in such a way, spoke in such a way, and remained silent in such a way. From that village I returned to my own village.’
dn2:94.2 | S: In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward recollection of past lives. | T: In the same way, great king, when his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright … the bhikkhu directs and inclines it to the knowledge of recollecting past lives, and he recollects his numerous past lives in their modes and their details.
dn2:94.4 | S: This too, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This too, great king, is a visible fruit of recluseship, more excellent and sublime than the previous ones.
dn2:95.0 | S: 4.3.3.7. Clairvoyance | T: The Knowledge of the Divine Eye
dn2:95.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings. | T: “When his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright, unblemished, free from defects, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to the knowledge of the passing away and reappearance of beings.
dn2:95.2 | S: With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds: ‘These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’ And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. | T: With the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, he sees beings passing away and reappearing—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate—and he understands how beings fare according to their kamma, thus: ‘These beings—who were endowed with bad conduct of body, speech, and mind, who reviled the noble ones, held wrong views, and undertook actions governed by wrong views—with the breakup of the body, after death, have reappeared in the plane of misery, the bad destinations, the lower realms, in hell. But these beings—who were endowed with good conduct of body, speech, and mind, who did not revile the noble ones, held right views, and undertook actions governed by right views—with the breakup of the body, after death, have reappeared in the good destinations, in the heavenly world.’ Thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, he sees beings passing away and reappearing—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate—and he understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma.
dn2:96.1 | S: Suppose there was a stilt longhouse at the central square. A person with clear eyes standing there might see humans entering and leaving a house, walking along the streets and paths, and sitting at the central square. They’d think: ‘These are people entering and leaving a house, walking along the streets and paths, and sitting at the central square.’ | T: “Great king, suppose in a central square there were a building with an upper terrace, and a man with keen sight standing there were to see people entering a house, leaving it, walking along the streets, and sitting in the central square. He would think to himself: ‘Those people are entering the house, those are leaving it, those are walking along the streets, and those are sitting in the central square.’
dn2:96.2 | S: In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings. | T: In the same way, great king, when his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright … the bhikkhu directs and inclines it to the knowledge of the passing away and reappearance of beings.
dn2:96.3 | P: So dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena satte passati cavamāne upapajjamāne hīne paṇīte suvaṇṇe dubbaṇṇe sugate duggate, yathākammūpage satte pajānāti: ‘ime vata bhonto sattā kāyaduccaritena samannāgatā vacīduccaritena samannāgatā manoduccaritena samannāgatā ariyānaṁ upavādakā micchādiṭṭhikā micchādiṭṭhikammasamādānā, te kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā apāyaṁ duggatiṁ vinipātaṁ nirayaṁ upapannā. Ime vā pana bhonto sattā kāyasucaritena samannāgatā vacīsucaritena samannāgatā manosucaritena samannāgatā ariyānaṁ anupavādakā sammādiṭṭhikā sammādiṭṭhikammasamādānā. Te kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā sugatiṁ saggaṁ lokaṁ upapannā’ti. Iti dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena satte passati cavamāne upapajjamāne hīne paṇīte suvaṇṇe dubbaṇṇe sugate duggate; yathākammūpage satte pajānāti. | T: With the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, he sees beings passing away and reappearing, and he understands how beings fare according to their kamma.
dn2:96.4 | S: This too, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This too, great king, is a visible fruit of recluseship more excellent and sublime than the previous ones.
dn2:97.0 | S: 4.3.3.8. Ending of Defilements | T: The Knowledge of the Destruction of the Cankers
dn2:97.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward knowledge of the ending of defilements. | T: “When his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright, unblemished, free from defects, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to the knowledge of the destruction of the cankers.
dn2:97.2 | S: They truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. | T: He understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering.’ He understands as it really is: ‘This is the origin of suffering.’ He understands as it really is: ‘This is the cessation of suffering.’ He understands as it really is: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
dn2:97.3 | S: They truly understand: ‘These are defilements’ … ‘This is the origin of defilements’ … ‘This is the cessation of defilements’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements’. | T: He understands as it really is: ‘These are the cankers.’ He understands as it really is: ‘This is the origin of the cankers.’ He understands as it really is: ‘This is the cessation of the cankers.’ He understands as it really is: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of the cankers.’
dn2:97.4 | S: Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. | T: “Knowing and seeing thus, his mind is liberated from the canker of sensual desire, from the canker of existence, and from the canker of ignorance.
dn2:97.5 | S: When they’re freed, they know they’re freed. | T: When it is liberated, the knowledge arises: ‘It is liberated.’
dn2:97.6 | S: They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’ | T: He understands: ‘Destroyed is birth, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further beyond this.’
dn2:98.1 | S: Suppose that in a mountain glen there was a lake that was transparent, clear, and unclouded. A person with clear eyes standing on the bank would see the clams and mussels, pebbles and gravel, and schools of fish swimming about or staying still. They’d think: ‘This lake is transparent, clear, and unclouded. And here are the clams and mussels, pebbles and gravel, and schools of fish swimming about or staying still.’ | T: “Great king, suppose in a mountain glen there were a lake with clear water, limpid and unsullied. A man with keen sight, standing on the bank, would see oyster-shells, sand and pebbles, and shoals of fish moving about and keeping still. He would think to himself: ‘This is a lake with clear water, limpid and unsullied, and there within it are oyster-shells, sand and pebbles, and shoals of fish moving about and keeping still.’
dn2:98.2 | S: In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward knowledge of the ending of defilements. | T: “In the same way, great king, when his mind is thus concentrated, pure and bright …. the bhikkhu directs and inclines it to the knowledge of the destruction of the cankers.
