## an8.22
an8.22:1.1 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Vajjis at Elephant Village. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Vajjis at Hatthigāma.
an8.22:1.2 | S: There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: | T: There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus….
an8.22:1.3 | S: “Mendicants, you should remember the householder Uggata of Elephant Village as someone who has eight amazing and incredible qualities.” | T: “Bhikkhus, you should remember the householder Ugga of Hatthigāma as one who possesses eight astounding and amazing qualities.”
an8.22:1.4 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: This is what the Blessed One said.
an8.22:1.5 | S: When he had spoken, the Holy One rose from his seat and entered his dwelling. | T: Having said this, the Fortunate One rose from his seat and entered his dwelling.
an8.22:2.1 | S: Then a certain mendicant robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the home of the householder Uggata of Elephant Village, where he sat down on the seat spread out. | T: Then, in the morning, a certain bhikkhu dressed, took his bowl and robe, and went to the residence of the householder Ugga of Hatthigāma. When he arrived, he sat down on the seat that was prepared for him.
an8.22:2.2 | S: Then Uggata of Elephant Village went up to that mendicant, bowed, and sat down to one side. The mendicant said to him: | T: Then the householder Ugga of Hatthigāma approached that bhikkhu, paid homage to him, and sat down to one side. The bhikkhu then said to him:
an8.22:2.3 | S: “Householder, the Buddha declared that you have eight amazing and incredible qualities. | T: “Householder, the Blessed One declared that you possess eight astounding and amazing qualities.
an8.22:2.4 | S: What are the eight qualities that he spoke of?” | T: What are they?”
an8.22:3.1 | S: “Sir, I don’t know | T: “I don’t know, Bhante,
an8.22:3.2 | S: what eight amazing and incredible qualities the Buddha was referring to. | T: what eight astounding and amazing qualities the Blessed One declared that I possess.
an8.22:3.3 | S: But these eight amazing and incredible qualities are found in me. | T: However, there are found in me eight astounding and amazing qualities.
an8.22:3.4 | S: Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.” | T: Listen and attend closely. I will speak.”
an8.22:3.5 | S: “Yes, householder,” replied the mendicant. | T: “Yes, householder,” the bhikkhu replied.
an8.22:3.6 | S: Uggata of Elephant Village said this: | T: The householder Ugga of Hatthigāma said this:
an8.22:3.7 | S: “Sir, when I first saw the Buddha off in the distance I was partying in the Dragon’s Park. | T: (1) “Bhante, I was carousing in the Nāga Grove when I first saw the Blessed One in the distance.
an8.22:3.8 | S: My heart was inspired as soon as I saw him, and I sobered up. | T: As soon as I saw him my mind acquired confidence in him and my drunkenness vanished.
an8.22:3.9 | S: This is the first incredible and amazing quality found in me. | T: This is the first astounding and amazing quality found in me.
an8.22:4.1 | S: With confident heart I paid homage to the Buddha. | T: (2) “With a confident mind, I attended on the Blessed One. The Blessed One then gave me a progressive discourse…. as in AN8.21 …
an8.22:4.2 | S: The Buddha taught me step by step, with | T: (none)
an8.22:4.3 | S: a talk on giving, ethical conduct, and heaven. He revealed the drawbacks of sensual pleasures, so sordid and corrupt, and the benefit of renunciation. | T: (none)
an8.22:4.4 | S: And when he knew that my mind was ready, pliable, rid of hindrances, elated, and confident he revealed the special teaching of the Buddhas: | T: (none)
an8.22:4.5 | S: suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. | T: (none)
an8.22:4.6 | S: Just as a clean cloth rid of stains would properly absorb dye, | T: (none)
an8.22:4.7 | S: in that very seat the stainless, immaculate vision of the Dhamma arose in me: | T: (none)
an8.22:4.8 | S: ‘Everything that is liable to arise is liable to cease.’ | T: (none)
an8.22:4.9 | S: I saw, attained, understood, and fathomed the Dhamma. I went beyond doubt, got rid of indecision, and became self-assured and independent of others regarding the Teacher’s instructions. Right there I went for refuge to the Buddha, his teaching, and the Saṅgha. And I undertook the five training rules with chastity as the fifth. | T: Right there I went for refuge to the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha, and undertook the training rules with celibacy as the fifth.
an8.22:4.10 | S: This is the second incredible and amazing quality found in me. | T: This is the second astounding and amazing quality found in me.
an8.22:5.1 | S: I had four teenage wives. | T: (3) “I had four young wives.
an8.22:5.2 | S: And I went to them and said: | T: I then went to them …
an8.22:5.3 | S: ‘Sisters, I’ve undertaken the five training rules with chastity as fifth. | T: (none)
an8.22:5.4 | S: If you wish, you may stay here, enjoy my wealth, and do good deeds. Or you can return to your own families. | T: (none)
an8.22:5.5 | S: Or would you prefer if I gave you to another man?’ | T: (none)
an8.22:5.6 | S: When I said this, my eldest wife said to me: | T: as in AN8.21 …
an8.22:5.7 | S: ‘Master, please give me to the man named so-and-so.’ | T: (none)
an8.22:5.8 | S: Then I summoned that man. Taking my wife with my left hand and a ceremonial vase with my right, I presented her to that man with the pouring of water. | T: (none)
an8.22:5.9 | S: But I can’t recall getting upset while giving away my teenage wife. | T: But even while giving away my young wife, I don’t recall that any alteration took place in my mind.
an8.22:5.10 | S: This is the third incredible and amazing quality found in me. | T: This is the third astounding and amazing quality found in me. (4)
an8.22:6.1 | S: And though my family has wealth, | T: “My family is wealthy but the wealth is shared unreservedly with virtuous people of good character.
an8.22:6.2 | S: it’s shared without reserve with ethical people of good character. | T: (none)
an8.22:6.3 | S: This is the fourth incredible and amazing quality found in me. | T: This is the fourth astounding and amazing quality found in me.
an8.22:7.1 | S: When I pay homage to a mendicant, | T: (5) “Whenever I attend on a bhikkhu,
an8.22:7.2 | S: I do so carefully, not carelessly. | T: I attend on him respectfully, not without respect.
an8.22:7.3 | S: If that venerable teaches me the Dhamma, | T: If that venerable one teaches me the Dhamma,
an8.22:7.4 | S: I listen carefully, not carelessly. | T: I listen to it respectfully, not without respect.
an8.22:7.5 | S: But if they don’t teach me the Dhamma, I teach them. | T: If he doesn’t teach me the Dhamma, then I teach him the Dhamma.
an8.22:7.6 | S: This is the fifth incredible and amazing quality found in me. | T: This is the fifth astounding and amazing quality found in me.
an8.22:8.1 | S: It’s not unusual for deities to come to me when the Saṅgha has been invited and announce: | T: (6) “It isn’t unusual that when the Saṅgha has been invited by me for a meal, deities come and report to me:
an8.22:8.2 | S: ‘Householder, that mendicant is freed both ways. That one is freed by wisdom. That one is a direct witness. That one is attained to view. That one is freed by faith. That one is a follower of teachings. That one is a follower by faith. That one is ethical, of good character. That one is unethical, of bad character.’ | T: ‘That bhikkhu, householder, is liberated in both respects. That one is liberated by wisdom. That one is a body witness. That one is attained to view. That one is liberated by faith. That one is a Dhamma follower. That one is a faith follower. That one is virtuous, of good character. That one is immoral, of bad character.’
an8.22:8.3 | S: But while I’m serving the Saṅgha I don’t recall thinking: | T: Still, when I am serving the Saṅgha, I do not recall thinking:
an8.22:8.4 | S: ‘Let me give this one just a little, and that one a lot.’ | T: ‘Let me give this one little, let me give that one a lot.’
an8.22:8.5 | S: Rather, I give impartially. | T: Rather, I give with an equal mind.
an8.22:8.6 | S: This is the sixth incredible and amazing quality found in me. | T: This is the sixth astounding and amazing quality found in me.
an8.22:9.1 | S: It’s not unusual for deities to come to me and announce: | T: (7) “It isn’t unusual for deities to come and report to me:
an8.22:9.2 | S: ‘Householder, the Buddha’s teaching is well explained!’ | T: ‘‘Householder, the Dhamma is well expounded by the Blessed One.’
an8.22:9.3 | S: When they say this I say to them: | T: I then say to those deities:
an8.22:9.4 | S: ‘The Buddha’s teaching is well explained, regardless of whether or not you deities say so!’ | T: ‘Whether you deities say so or not, the Dhamma is well expounded by the Blessed One.’
an8.22:9.5 | S: But I don’t recall getting too excited by the fact that | T: Still, I do not recall any mental exultation arising because deities come to me or because I converse with deities.
an8.22:9.6 | S: the deities come to me, and I have a conversation with them. | T: (none)
an8.22:9.7 | S: This is the seventh incredible and amazing quality found in me. | T: This is the seventh astounding and amazing quality found in me.
an8.22:10.1 | S: If I pass away before the Buddha, it would be no wonder if the Buddha declares of me: | T: (8) “If I were to pass away before the Blessed One, it wouldn’t be surprising if the Blessed One would declare of me:
an8.22:10.2 | S: ‘The householder Uggata of Elephant Village is bound by no fetter that might return him to this world.’ | T: ‘There is no fetter bound by which the householder Ugga of Hatthigāma might return to this world.’
an8.22:10.3 | S: This is the eighth incredible and amazing quality found in me. | T: This is the eighth astounding and amazing quality found in me.
an8.22:11.1 | S: These eight amazing and incredible qualities are found in me. | T: “These, Bhante, are eight astounding and amazing qualities found in me.
an8.22:11.2 | S: But I don’t know | T: But I don’t know what eight astounding and amazing qualities the Blessed One declared that I possess.”
an8.22:11.3 | S: what eight amazing and incredible qualities the Buddha was referring to.” | T: (none)
an8.22:12.1 | S: Then that mendicant, after taking almsfood in Uggata of Elephant Village’s home, rose from his seat and left. | T: Then that bhikkhu, having received almsfood at the residence of the householder Ugga of Hatthigāma, rose from his seat and departed.
an8.22:12.2 | S: Then after the meal, on his return from almsround, he went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. | T: After his meal, on returning from his alms round, he approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side,
an8.22:12.3 | S: He informed the Buddha of all he had discussed with the householder Uggata of Elephant Village. The Buddha said: | T: and reported to him the entire conversation he had had with the householder Ugga of Hatthigāma. The Blessed One said:
an8.22:13.1 | S: “Good, good, mendicant! | T: “Good, good, bhikkhu!
an8.22:13.2 | S: When I declared that the householder Uggata of Elephant Village was someone who has eight amazing and incredible qualities, I was referring to the same eight qualities that he rightly explained to you. | T: I had declared that the householder Ugga of Hatthigāma possesses these same eight astounding and amazing qualities that he rightly explained to you.
an8.22:13.3 | S: You should remember the householder Uggata of Elephant Village as someone who has these eight amazing and incredible qualities.” | T: You should remember the householder Ugga of Hatthigāma as one who possesses these eight astounding and amazing qualities.”

## mn31
mn31:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
mn31:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying at Ñātika in the brick house. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Nādikā in the Brick House.
mn31:2.1 | S: Now at that time the venerables Anuruddha, Nandiya, and Kimbila were staying in the sal forest park at Gosiṅga. | T: Now on that occasion the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable Nandiya, and the venerable Kimbila were living at the Park of the Gosinga Sāla-tree Wood.
mn31:3.1 | S: Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to that park. | T: Then, when it was evening, the Blessed One rose from meditation and went to the Park of the Gosinga Sāla-tree Wood.
mn31:3.2 | S: The park keeper saw the Buddha coming off in the distance | T: The park keeper saw the Blessed One coming in the distance and told him:
mn31:3.3 | S: and said to him, | T: (none)
mn31:3.4 | S: “Don’t come into this park, ascetic. | T: “Do not enter this park, recluse.
mn31:3.5 | S: There are three gentlemen staying here whose nature is to desire self-knowledge. | T: There are three clansmen here seeking their own good.
mn31:3.6 | S: Do not disturb them.” | T: Do not disturb them.”
mn31:4.1 | S: Anuruddha heard the park keeper conversing with the Buddha, | T: The venerable Anuruddha heard the park keeper speaking to the Blessed One and told him:
mn31:4.2 | S: and said to him, | T: (none)
mn31:4.3 | S: “Don’t keep the Buddha out, good park keeper! | T: “Friend park keeper, do not keep the Blessed One out.
mn31:4.4 | S: Our Teacher, the Blessed One, has arrived.” | T: It is our Teacher, the Blessed One, who has come.”
mn31:4.5 | S: Then Anuruddha went to Nandiya and Kimbila, and said to them, | T: Then the venerable Anuruddha went to the venerable Nandiya and the venerable Kimbila and said:
mn31:4.6 | S: “Come forth, venerables, come forth! Our Teacher, the Blessed One, has arrived!” | T: “Come out, venerable sirs, come out! Our Teacher, the Blessed One, has come.”
mn31:5.1 | S: Then Anuruddha, Nandiya, and Kimbila came out to greet the Buddha. | T: Then all three went to meet the Blessed One.
mn31:5.2 | S: One received his bowl and robe, one spread out a seat, and one set out water for washing his feet. | T: One took his bowl and outer robe, one prepared a seat, and one set out water for washing the feet.
mn31:5.3 | S: The Buddha sat down on the seat spread out, | T: The Blessed One sat down on the seat made ready and washed his feet.
mn31:5.4 | S: and washed his feet. | T: (none)
mn31:5.5 | S: Those venerables bowed and sat down to one side. | T: Then those three venerable ones paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down at one side.
mn31:5.6 | S: The Buddha said to Anuruddha, | T: When they were seated, the Blessed One said to them:
mn31:5.7 | S: “I hope you’re keeping well, Anuruddha and friends, I hope you’re all right. And I hope you’re having no trouble getting almsfood.” | T: “I hope you are all keeping well, Anuruddha, I hope you are all comfortable, I hope you are not having any trouble getting almsfood.”
mn31:5.8 | S: “We’re keeping well, Blessed One, we’re getting by. And we have no trouble getting almsfood.” | T: “We are keeping well, Blessed One, we are comfortable, and we are not having any trouble getting almsfood.”
mn31:6.1 | S: “I hope you’re living in harmony, appreciating each other, without quarreling, blending like milk and water, and regarding each other with kindly eyes?” | T: “I hope, Anuruddha, that you are all living in concord, with mutual appreciation, without disputing, blending like milk and water, viewing each other with kindly eyes.”
mn31:6.2 | S: “Indeed, sir, we live in harmony as you say.” | T: “Surely, venerable sir, we are living in concord, with mutual appreciation, without disputing, blending like milk and water, viewing each other with kindly eyes.”
mn31:6.3 | S: “But how do you live this way?” | T: “But, Anuruddha, how do you live thus?”
mn31:7.1 | S: “In this case, sir, I think: | T: “Venerable sir, as to that, I think thus:
mn31:7.2 | S: ‘I’m fortunate, so very fortunate, | T: ‘It is a gain for me, it is a great gain for me,
mn31:7.3 | S: to live together with spiritual companions such as these.’ | T: that I am living with such companions in the holy life.’
mn31:7.4 | S: I consistently treat these venerables with kindness by way of body, speech, and mind, both in public and in private. | T: I maintain bodily acts of loving-kindness towards those venerable ones both openly and privately; I maintain verbal acts of loving-kindness towards them both openly and privately; I maintain mental acts of loving-kindness towards them both openly and privately.
mn31:7.7 | S: I think, | T: I consider:
mn31:7.8 | S: ‘Why don’t I set aside my own ideas and just go along with these venerables’ ideas?’ | T: ‘Why should I not set aside what I wish to do and do what these venerable ones wish to do?’ Then I set aside what I wish to do and do what these venerable ones wish to do.
mn31:7.9 | S: And that’s what I do. | T: (none)
mn31:7.10 | S: Though we’re different in body, sir, we’re one in mind, it seems to me.” | T: We are different in body, venerable sir, but one in mind.”
mn31:7.11 | S: And the venerables Nandiya and Kimbila spoke likewise, and they added: | T: The venerable Nandiya and the venerable Kimbila each spoke likewise, adding:
mn31:7.13 | P: “mayhampi, bhante, evaṁ hoti: | T: “That is how,
mn31:7.23 | S: “That’s how we live in harmony, appreciating each other, without quarreling, blending like milk and water, and regarding each other with kindly eyes.” | T: venerable sir, we are living in concord, with mutual appreciation, without disputing, blending like milk and water, viewing each other with kindly eyes.”
mn31:8.1 | S: “Good, good, Anuruddha and friends! | T: “Good, good, Anuruddha.
mn31:8.2 | S: But I hope you’re living diligently, keen, and resolute?” | T: I hope that you all abide diligent, ardent, and resolute.”
mn31:9.1 | S: “Indeed, sir, we live diligently.” | T: “Surely, venerable sir, we abide diligent, ardent, and resolute.”
mn31:9.2 | S: “But how do you live this way?” | T: “But, Anuruddha, how do you abide thus?”
mn31:9.3 | S: “In this case, sir, whoever returns first from almsround prepares the seats, and puts out the drinking water and the rubbish bin. | T: “Venerable sir, as to that, whichever of us returns first from the village with almsfood prepares the seats, sets out the water for drinking and for washing, and puts the refuse bucket in its place.
mn31:9.4 | S: If there’s remainder, whoever returns last eats it if they like. Otherwise they throw it out where there is little that grows, or drop it into water that has no living creatures. | T: Whichever of us returns last eats any food left over, if he wishes; otherwise he throws it away where there is no greenery or drops it into water where there is no life.
mn31:9.5 | S: Then they put away the seats, drinking water, and rubbish bin, and sweep the refectory. | T: He puts away the seats and the water for drinking and for washing. He puts away the refuse bucket after washing it and he sweeps out the refectory.
mn31:9.6 | S: If someone sees that the pot of water for washing, drinking, or the toilet is empty they set it up. | T: Whoever notices that the pots of water for drinking, washing, or the latrine are low or empty takes care of them.
mn31:9.7 | S: If he can’t do it, he summons another with a wave of the hand, and they set it up by lending each other a hand to lift. But we don’t break into speech for that reason. | T: If they are too heavy for him, he calls someone else by a signal of the hand and they move it by joining hands, but because of this we do not break out into speech.
mn31:9.8 | S: And every five days we sit together for the whole night and discuss the teachings. | T: But every five days we sit together all night discussing the Dhamma.
mn31:9.9 | S: That’s how we live diligently, keen, and resolute.” | T: That is how we abide diligent, ardent, and resolute.”
mn31:10.1 | S: “Good, good, Anuruddha and friends! | T: “Good, good, Anuruddha.
mn31:10.2 | S: But as you live diligently like this, have you achieved any superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones, a comfortable meditation?” | T: But while you abide thus diligent, ardent, and resolute, have you attained any superhuman state, a distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones, a comfortable abiding?”
mn31:10.3 | S: “How could we not, sir? | T: “Why not, venerable sir?
mn31:10.4 | S: Whenever we want, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, we enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: Here, venerable sir, whenever we want, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, we enter upon and abide in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
mn31:10.5 | S: This is a superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones, a comfortable meditation, that we have achieved while living diligent, keen, and resolute.” | T: Venerable sir, this is a superhuman state, a distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones, a comfortable abiding, which we have attained while abiding diligent, ardent, and resolute.”
mn31:11-13.1 | S: “Good, good! | T: “Good, good, Anuruddha.
mn31:11-13.2 | S: But have you achieved any other superhuman distinction for going beyond and stilling that meditation?” | T: But is there any other superhuman state, a distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones, a comfortable abiding, which you have attained by surmounting that abiding, by making that abiding subside?”
mn31:11-13.3 | S: “How could we not, sir? | T: “Why not, venerable sir?
mn31:11-13.4 | S: Whenever we want, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, we enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: Here, venerable sir, whenever we want, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, we enter upon and abide in the second jhāna…With the fading away as well of rapture…we enter upon and abide in the third jhāna…With the abandoning of pleasure and pain…we enter upon and abide in the fourth jhāna…Venerable sir,
mn31:11-13.5 | S: This is another superhuman distinction that we have achieved for going beyond and stilling that meditation.” | T: this is another superhuman state, a distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones, a comfortable abiding, which we have attained by surmounting the preceding abiding, by making that abiding subside.”
mn31:14.1 | S: “Good, good! | T: (none)
mn31:14.2 | S: But have you achieved any other superhuman distinction for going beyond and stilling that meditation?” | T: (none)
mn31:14.3 | S: “How could we not, sir? | T: (none)
mn31:14.4 | S: Whenever we want, with the fading away of rapture, we enter and remain in the third absorption, where we meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, experiencing for themselves the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’ | T: (none)
mn31:14.5 | S: This is another superhuman distinction that we have achieved for going beyond and stilling that meditation.” | T: (none)
mn31:15.1 | S: “Good, good! | T: (none)
mn31:15.2 | S: But have you achieved any other superhuman distinction for going beyond and stilling that meditation?” | T: (none)
mn31:15.3 | S: “How could we not, sir? | T: (none)
mn31:15.4 | S: Whenever we want, with the giving up of pleasure and pain, and the disappearance of former happiness and sadness, we enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. | T: (none)
mn31:15.5 | S: This is another superhuman distinction that we have achieved for going beyond and stilling that meditation.” | T: (none)
mn31:16.1 | S: “Good, good! | T: “Good, good, Anuruddha.
mn31:16.2 | S: But have you achieved any other superhuman distinction for going beyond and stilling that meditation?” | T: But is there any other superhuman state…which you have attained by surmounting that abiding, by making that abiding subside?”
mn31:16.3 | S: “How could we not, sir? | T: “Why not, venerable sir?
mn31:16.4 | S: Whenever we want, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite’, we enter and remain in the dimension of infinite space. | T: Here, venerable sir, whenever we want, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of sensory impact, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite,’ we enter upon and abide in the base of infinite space.
mn31:16.5 | S: This is another superhuman distinction that we have achieved for going beyond and stilling that meditation.” | T: Venerable sir, this is another superhuman state…which we have attained by surmounting the preceding abiding, by making that abiding subside.”
mn31:17.1 | S: “Good, good! | T: “Good, good, Anuruddha.
mn31:17.2 | S: But have you achieved any other superhuman distinction for going beyond and stilling that meditation?” | T: But is there any other superhuman state…which you have attained by surmounting that abiding, by making that abiding subside?”
mn31:17.3 | S: “How could we not, sir? | T: “Why not, venerable sir?
mn31:17.4 | S: Whenever we want, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite’, we enter and remain in the dimension of infinite consciousness. … | T: Here, venerable sir, whenever we want, by completely surmounting the base of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite,’
mn31:17.5 | S: going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing at all’, we enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness. … | T: we enter upon and abide in the base of infinite consciousness…By completely surmounting the base of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing,
mn31:17.6 | S: going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, we enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. | T: ’ we enter upon and abide in the base of nothingness…By completely surmounting the base of nothingness, we enter upon and abide in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
mn31:17.7 | S: This is another superhuman distinction that we have achieved for going beyond and stilling that meditation.” | T: Venerable sir, this is another superhuman state…which we have attained by surmounting the preceding abiding, by making that abiding subside.”
mn31:18.1 | S: “Good, good! | T: “Good, good Anuruddha.
mn31:18.2 | S: But have you achieved any other superhuman distinction for going beyond and stilling that meditation?” | T: But is there any other superhuman state, a distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones, a comfortable abiding, which you have attained by surmounting that abiding, by making that abiding subside?”
mn31:18.3 | S: “How could we not, sir? | T: “Why not, venerable sir?
mn31:18.4 | S: Whenever we want, going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, we enter and remain in the cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, our defilements have come to an end. | T: Here, venerable sir, whenever we want, by completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, we enter upon and abide in the cessation of perception and feeling. And our taints are destroyed by our seeing with wisdom.
mn31:18.5 | S: This is another superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones, a comfortable meditation, that we have achieved for going beyond and stilling that meditation. | T: Venerable sir, this is another superhuman state, a distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones, a comfortable abiding, which we have attained by surmounting the preceding abiding, by making that abiding subside.
mn31:18.6 | S: And we don’t see any better or finer way of meditating comfortably than this.” | T: And, venerable sir, we do not see any other comfortable abiding higher or more sublime than this one.”
mn31:18.7 | S: “Good, good! | T: “Good, good Anuruddha.
mn31:18.8 | S: There is no better or finer way of meditating comfortably than this.” | T: There is no other comfortable abiding higher or more sublime than that one.”
mn31:19.1 | S: Then the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired the venerables Anuruddha, Nandiya, and Kimbila with a Dhamma talk, after which he rose from his seat and left. | T: Then, when the Blessed One had instructed, urged, roused, and gladdened the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable Nandiya, and the venerable Kimbila with a talk on the Dhamma, he rose from his seat and departed.
mn31:20.1 | S: The venerables then accompanied the Buddha for a little way before turning back. Nandiya and Kimbila said to Anuruddha, | T: After they had accompanied the Blessed One a little way and turned back again, the venerable Nandiya and the venerable Kimbila asked the venerable Anuruddha:
mn31:20.2 | S: “Did we ever tell you that we had | T: “Have we ever reported to the venerable Anuruddha that we have obtained those abidings and attainments that the venerable Anuruddha,
mn31:20.3 | S: gained such and such meditations and attainments, up to the ending of defilements, as you revealed to the Buddha?” | T: in the Blessed One’s presence, ascribed to us up to the destruction of the taints?”
mn31:20.4 | S: “The venerables did not tell me that they had | T: “The venerable ones have never reported to me that they have obtained those abidings and attainments.
mn31:20.5 | S: gained such meditations and attainments. But I discovered it by encompassing your minds, | T: Yet by encompassing the venerable ones’ minds with my own mind, I know that they have obtained those abidings and attainments.
mn31:20.7 | S: and deities also told me. | T: And deities have also reported to me:
mn31:20.8 | P: ‘imāsañca imāsañca vihārasamāpattīnaṁ ime āyasmanto lābhino’ti. | T: ‘These venerable ones have obtained those abidings and attainments.’
mn31:20.9 | S: I answered when the Buddha directly asked about it.” | T: Then I declared it when directly questioned by the Blessed One.”
mn31:21.1 | S: Then the native spirit Dīgha Parajana went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him, | T: Then the spirit Dīgha Parajana went to the Blessed One. After paying homage to the Blessed One, he stood at one side and said:
mn31:21.2 | S: “The Vajjis are lucky! The Vajjian people are so very lucky | T: “It is a gain for the Vajjians, venerable sir, a great gain for the Vajjian people that the Tathāgata,
mn31:21.3 | S: that the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha stays there, as well as these three gentlemen, | T: accomplished and fully enlightened, dwells among them and these three clansmen,
mn31:21.4 | S: the venerables Anuruddha, Nandiya, and Kimbila.” | T: the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable Nandiya, and the venerable Kimbila!”
mn31:21.5 | S: Hearing the cry of Dīgha Parajana, the earth gods raised the cry … | T: On hearing the exclamation of the spirit Dīgha Parajana, the earth gods exclaimed:
mn31:21.6 | P: “lābhā vata, bho, vajjīnaṁ, suladdhalābhā vajjipajāya, | T: “It is a gain for the Vajjians, a great gain for the Vajjian people that the Tathāgata,
mn31:21.7 | P: yattha tathāgato viharati arahaṁ sammāsambuddho, ime ca tayo kulaputtā— | T: accomplished and fully enlightened, dwells among them and these three clansmen,
mn31:21.8 | P: āyasmā ca anuruddho, āyasmā ca nandiyo, āyasmā ca kimilo”ti. | T: the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable Nandiya, and the venerable Kimbila!”
mn31:21.9 | S: Hearing the cry of the earth gods, the gods of the four great kings … | T: On hearing the exclamation of the earth gods,
mn31:21.10 | S: the gods of the thirty-three … | T: the gods of the heaven of the Four Great Kings…the gods of the heaven of the Thirty-three…the Yāma gods…the gods of the Tusita heaven…the gods who delight in creating…the gods who wield power over others’ creations…the gods of Brahmā’s retinue exclaimed:
mn31:21.11 | S: the gods of Yama … | T: (none)
mn31:21.12 | S: the joyful gods … | T: (none)
mn31:21.13 | S: the gods who love to create … | T: (none)
mn31:21.14 | S: the gods who control what is created by others … | T: (none)
mn31:21.15 | S: the gods of the Divinity’s host raised the cry, | T: (none)
mn31:21.16 | S: “The Vajjis are lucky! The Vajjian people are so very lucky | T: “It is a gain for the Vajjians, a great gain for the Vajjian people that the Tathāgata,
mn31:21.17 | S: that the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha stays there, as well as these three gentlemen, | T: accomplished and fully enlightened, dwells among them and these three clansmen,
mn31:21.18 | S: the venerables Anuruddha, Nandiya, and Kimbila.” | T: the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable Nandiya, and the venerable Kimbila!”
mn31:21.19 | S: And so at that moment, that second, that hour, those venerables were known as far as the realm of divinity. | T: Thus at that instant, at that moment, those venerable ones were known as far as the Brahma-world.
mn31:22.1 | S: “That’s so true, Dīgha! That’s so true! | T: The Blessed One said: “So it is, Dīgha, so it is!
mn31:22.2 | S: If the family from which those three gentlemen went forth from the lay life to homelessness were to recollect those venerables with confident heart, that would be for that family’s lasting welfare and happiness. | T: And if the clan from which those three clansmen went forth from the home life into homelessness should remember them with confident heart, that would lead to the welfare and happiness of that clan for a long time. And if the retinue of the clan from which those three clansmen went forth …the village from which they went forth…the town from which they went forth…the city from which they went forth…the country from which those three clansmen went forth from the home life into homelessness should remember them with confident heart,
mn31:22.3 | S: If the family circle … | T: (none)
mn31:22.4 | S: village … | T: (none)
mn31:22.5 | S: town … | T: (none)
mn31:22.6 | S: city … | T: (none)
mn31:22.7 | S: country … | T: that would lead to the welfare and happiness of that country for a long time.
mn31:22.8 | S: all the aristocrats … | T: (none)
mn31:22.9 | S: all the brahmins … | T: (none)
mn31:22.10 | S: all the peasants … | T: (none)
mn31:22.11 | S: all the workers were to recollect those venerables with confident heart, that would be for all those menials’ lasting welfare and happiness. | T: If all nobles should remember those three clansmen with confident heart, that would lead to the welfare and happiness of the nobles for a long time. If all brahmins…all merchants…all workers should remember those three clansmen with confident heart, that would lead to the welfare and happiness of the workers for a long time.
mn31:22.12 | S: If the whole world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—were to recollect those venerables with confident heart, that would be for the whole world’s lasting welfare and happiness. | T: If the world with its gods, its Māras, and its Brahmās, this generation with its recluses and brahmins, its princes and its people, should remember those three clansmen with confident heart,
mn31:22.13 | S: See, Dīgha, how those three gentlemen are practicing for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans!” | T: that would lead to the welfare and happiness of the world for a long time. See, Dīgha, how those three clansmen are practising for the welfare and happiness of the many, out of compassion for the world, for the good, welfare and happiness of gods and humans.”
mn31:22.14 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: That is what the Blessed One said.
mn31:22.15 | S: Satisfied, the native spirit Dīgha Parajana approved what the Buddha said. | T: The spirit Dīgha Parajana was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.

## an8.9
an8.9:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, you could rightly call Nanda ‘Gentleman’, | T: “Bhikkhus, (1) one speaking rightly would say of Nanda that he is a clansman,
an8.9:1.2 | S: ‘strong’, | T: (2) that he is strong, (3) that he is graceful, and (4) that he is strongly prone to lust.
an8.9:1.3 | S: ‘lovely’, | T: (none)
an8.9:1.4 | S: and ‘lustful’. | T: (none)
an8.9:1.5 | S: How could he live the full and pure spiritual life unless he guards the sense doors, eats in moderation, is dedicated to wakefulness, and has mindfulness and situational awareness? | T: How else could Nanda lead the complete and pure spiritual life unless (5) he guarded the doors of the sense faculties, (6) observed moderation in eating, (7) was intent on wakefulness, and (8) possessed mindfulness and clear comprehension?
an8.9:1.6 | S: This is how Nanda guards the sense doors. | T: “Bhikkhus, this is how Nanda guards the doors of the sense faculties:
an8.9:1.7 | S: If he has to look to the east, he wholeheartedly concentrates before looking, thinking: | T: (none)
an8.9:1.8 | S: ‘When I look to the east, bad, unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure will not overwhelm me.’ | T: If he needs to look to the east, he does so after he has fully considered the matter and clearly comprehends it thus: ‘When I look to the east, bad unwholesome states of longing and dejection will not flow in upon me.’
an8.9:1.9 | S: In this way he’s aware of the situation. | T: (none)
an8.9:2.1 | S: If he has to look to the west … | T: If he needs to look to the west …
an8.9:2.2 | S: north … | T: to the north …
an8.9:2.3 | S: south … | T: to the south …
an8.9:2.4 | S: up … | T: (none)
an8.9:2.5 | S: down … | T: (none)
an8.9:2.6 | S: If he has to survey the intermediate directions, he wholeheartedly concentrates before looking, thinking: | T: to look up … to look down … to survey the intermediate directions, he does so after he has fully considered the matter and clearly comprehends it thus:
an8.9:2.7 | S: ‘When I survey the intermediate directions, bad, unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure will not overwhelm me.’ | T: ‘When I look to the intermediate directions, bad unwholesome states of longing and dejection will not flow in upon me.’
an8.9:2.8 | S: In this way he’s aware of the situation. | T: (none)
an8.9:2.9 | S: This is how Nanda guards the sense doors. | T: That is how Nanda guards the doors of the sense faculties.
an8.9:3.1 | S: This is how Nanda eats in moderation. | T: “This is how Nanda observes moderation in eating:
an8.9:3.2 | S: Nanda reflects rationally on the food he eats: | T: Here, reflecting carefully,
an8.9:3.3 | S: ‘Not for fun, indulgence, adornment, or decoration, but only to sustain this body, to avoid harm, and to support spiritual practice. In this way, I shall put an end to old discomfort and not give rise to new discomfort, and I will have the means to keep going, blamelessness, and a comfortable abiding.’ | T: Nanda consumes food neither for amusement nor for intoxication nor for the sake of physical beauty and attractiveness, but only for the support and maintenance of this body, for avoiding harm, and for assisting the spiritual life, considering: ‘Thus I shall terminate the old feeling and not arouse a new feeling, and I shall be healthy and blameless and dwell at ease.’
an8.9:3.4 | S: This is how Nanda eats in moderation. | T: That is how Nanda observes moderation in eating.
an8.9:4.1 | S: This is how Nanda is committed to wakefulness. | T: “This is how Nanda is intent on wakefulness:
an8.9:4.2 | S: Nanda practices walking and sitting meditation by day, purifying his mind from obstacles. | T: During the day, while walking back and forth and sitting, Nanda purifies his mind of obstructive qualities.
an8.9:4.3 | S: In the first watch of the night, he continues to practice walking and sitting meditation. | T: In the first watch of the night, while walking back and forth and sitting, he purifies his mind of obstructive qualities.
an8.9:4.4 | S: In the middle watch, he lies down in the lion’s posture—on the right side, placing one foot on top of the other—mindful and aware, and focused on the time of getting up. | T: In the middle watch of the night he lies down on the right side in the lion’s posture, with one foot overlapping the other, mindful and clearly comprehending,
an8.9:4.5 | S: In the last watch, he gets up and continues to practice walking and sitting meditation, purifying his mind from obstacles. | T: after noting in his mind the idea of rising. After rising, in the last watch of the night, while walking back and forth and sitting, he purifies his mind of obstructive qualities.
an8.9:4.6 | S: This is how Nanda is committed to wakefulness. | T: That is how Nanda is intent on wakefulness.
an8.9:5.1 | S: This is how Nanda has mindfulness and situational awareness. | T: “This is Nanda’s mindfulness and clear comprehension:
an8.9:5.2 | S: Nanda knows feelings as they arise, as they remain, and as they go away. | T: Nanda knows feelings as they arise, as they remain present, as they disappear;
an8.9:5.3 | S: He knows perceptions as they arise, as they remain, and as they go away. | T: he knows perceptions as they arise, as they remain present, as they disappear;
an8.9:5.4 | S: He knows thoughts as they arise, as they remain, and as they go away. | T: he knows thoughts as they arise, as they remain present, as they disappear.
an8.9:5.5 | S: This is how Nanda has mindfulness and situational awareness. | T: That is Nanda’s mindfulness and clear comprehension.
an8.9:6.1 | S: How could Nanda live the full and pure spiritual life unless he guards the sense doors, eats in moderation, is dedicated to wakefulness, and has mindfulness and situational awareness?” | T: “How else, bhikkhus, could Nanda lead the complete and pure spiritual life unless he guarded the doors of the sense faculties, observed moderation in eating, was intent on wakefulness, and possessed mindfulness and clear comprehension?”

## mn41
mn41:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
mn41:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he arrived at a village of the Kosalan brahmins named Sālā. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering by stages in the Kosalan Country with a large Sangha of bhikkhus, and eventually he arrived at a Kosalan brahmin village named Sālā.
mn41:2.1 | S: The brahmins and householders of Sālā heard, | T: The brahmin householders of Sālā heard:
mn41:2.2 | S: “It seems the ascetic Gotama—a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family—while wandering in the land of the Kosalans has arrived at Sālā, together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants. | T: “The recluse Gotama, the son of the Sakyans who went forth from a Sakyan clan, has been wandering in the Kosalan country with a large Sangha of bhikkhus and has come to Sālā.
mn41:2.3 | S: He has this good reputation: | T: Now a good report of Master Gotama has been spread to this effect:
mn41:2.4 | S: ‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ | T: ‘That Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened, blessed.
mn41:2.5 | S: He has realized with his own insight this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—and he makes it known to others. | T: He declares this world with its gods, its Māras, and its Brahmās, this generation with its recluses and brahmins, its princes and its people, which he has himself realised with direct knowledge.
mn41:2.6 | S: He teaches Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. | T: He teaches the Dhamma good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing,
mn41:2.7 | S: He reveals an entirely full and pure spiritual life. | T: and he reveals a holy life that is utterly perfect and pure.’
mn41:2.8 | S: It’s good to see such perfected ones.” | T: Now it is good to see such arahants.”
mn41:3.1 | S: Then the brahmins and householders of Sālā went up to the Buddha. Before sitting down to one side, some bowed, some exchanged greetings and polite conversation, some held up their cupped palms toward the Buddha, some announced their name and clan, while some kept silent. Seated to one side they said to the Buddha: | T: Then the brahmin householders of Sālā went to the Blessed One. Some paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down at one side; some exchanged greetings with him, and when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, sat down at one side; some extended their hands in reverential salutation towards the Blessed One and sat down at one side; some pronounced their name and clan in the Blessed One’s presence and sat down at one side; some kept silent and sat down at one side. When they were seated, they said to the Blessed One:
mn41:4.1 | S: “What is the cause, worthy Gotama, what is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell? | T: “Master Gotama, what is the cause and condition why some beings here, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in states of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell?
mn41:4.2 | S: And what is the cause, worthy Gotama, what is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm?” | T: And what is the cause and condition why some beings here, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world?”
mn41:5.1 | S: “Unprincipled and immoral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: “Householders, it is by reason of conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, by reason of unrighteous conduct that some beings here, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in states of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.
mn41:5.2 | S: Principled and moral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.” | T: It is by reason of conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, by reason of righteous conduct that some beings here, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.”
mn41:6.1 | S: “We don’t understand the detailed meaning of the worthy Gotama’s brief statement. | T: “We do not understand the detailed meaning of Master Gotama’s utterance, which he has spoken in brief without expounding the detailed meaning.
mn41:6.2 | S: Worthy Gotama, please teach us this matter in detail so we can understand the meaning.” | T: It would be good if Master Gotama would teach us the Dhamma so that we might understand the detailed meaning of his utterance.”
mn41:6.3 | S: “Well then, householders, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.” | T: “Then, householders, listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”
mn41:6.4 | S: “Yes, worthy sir,” they replied. | T: “Yes, venerable sir,” they replied.
mn41:6.5 | S: The Buddha said this: | T: The Blessed One said this:
mn41:7.1 | S: “Householders, unprincipled and immoral conduct is threefold by way of body, fourfold by way of speech, and threefold by way of mind. | T: “Householders, there are three kinds of bodily conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct. There are four kinds of verbal conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct. There are three kinds of mental conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct.
mn41:8.1 | S: And how is unprincipled and immoral conduct threefold by way of body? | T: “And how, householders, are there three kinds of bodily conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct?
mn41:8.2 | S: It’s when someone kills living creatures. They’re violent, bloody-handed, a hardened killer, merciless to living beings. | T: Here someone kills living beings; he is murderous, bloody-handed, given to blows and violence, merciless to living beings.
mn41:8.3 | S: They steal. With the intention to commit theft, they take the wealth or belongings of others from village or wilderness. | T: He takes what is not given; he takes by way of theft the wealth and property of others in the village or forest.
mn41:8.4 | S: They commit sexual misconduct. They have relations with women who have their mother, father, both mother and father, brother, sister, relatives, or clan as guardian. They have relations with a woman who is protected on principle, or who has a husband, or whose violation is punishable by law, or even one who has been garlanded as a token of betrothal. | T: He misconducts himself in sensual pleasures; he has intercourse with women who are protected by their mother, father, mother and father, brother, sister, or relatives, who have a husband, who are protected by law, and even with those who are garlanded in token of betrothal.
mn41:8.5 | S: This is how unprincipled and immoral conduct is threefold by way of body. | T: That is how there are three kinds of bodily conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct.
mn41:9.1 | S: And how is unprincipled and immoral conduct fourfold by way of speech? | T: “And how, householders, are there four kinds of verbal conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct?
mn41:9.2 | S: It’s when someone lies. They’re summoned to a council, an assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to bear witness: ‘Please, my friend, say what you know.’ Not knowing, they say ‘I know.’ Knowing, they say ‘I don’t know.’ Not seeing, they say ‘I see.’ And seeing, they say ‘I don’t see.’ So they deliberately lie for the sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly reason. | T: Here someone speaks falsehood; when summoned to a court, or to a meeting, or to his relatives’ presence, or to his guild, or to the royal family’s presence, and questioned as a witness thus: ‘So, good man, tell what you know,’ not knowing, he says, ‘I know,’ or knowing, he says, ‘I do not know’; not seeing, he says, ‘I see,’ or seeing, he says, ‘I do not see’; in full awareness he speaks falsehood for his own ends, or for another’s ends, or for some trifling worldly end.
mn41:9.3 | S: They backbite. They repeat in one place what they heard in another so as to divide people against each other. And so they divide those who are harmonious, supporting division, delighting in division, loving division, speaking words that promote division. | T: He speaks maliciously; he repeats elsewhere what he has heard here in order to divide those people from these, or he repeats to these people what he has heard elsewhere in order to divide these people from those; thus he is one who divides those who are united, a creator of divisions, who enjoys discord, rejoices in discord, delights in discord, a speaker of words that create discord.
mn41:9.4 | S: They speak harshly. They use the kinds of words that are cruel, nasty, hurtful, offensive, bordering on anger, not leading to immersion. | T: He speaks harshly; he utters such words as are rough, hard, hurtful to others, offensive to others, bordering on anger, unconducive to concentration.
mn41:9.5 | S: They talk nonsense. Their speech is untimely, and is neither factual nor beneficial. It has nothing to do with the teaching or the training. Their words have no value, and are untimely, unreasonable, rambling, and pointless. | T: He is a gossip; he speaks at the wrong time, speaks what is not fact, speaks what is useless, speaks contrary to the Dhamma and the Discipline; at the wrong time he speaks such words as are worthless, unreasonable, immoderate, and unbeneficial.
mn41:9.6 | S: This is how unprincipled and immoral conduct is fourfold by way of speech. | T: That is how there are four kinds of verbal conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct.
mn41:10.1 | S: And how is unprincipled and immoral conduct threefold by way of mind? | T: “And how, householders, are there three kinds of mental conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct?
mn41:10.2 | S: It’s when someone is covetous. They covet the wealth and belongings of others: ‘Oh, if only their belongings were mine!’ | T: Here someone is covetous; he covets the wealth and property of others thus: ‘Oh, may what belongs to another be mine!’
mn41:10.3 | S: They have ill will and malicious intentions: ‘May these sentient beings be killed, slaughtered, slain, destroyed, or annihilated!’ | T: Or he has a mind of ill will and intentions of hate thus: ‘May these beings be slain and slaughtered, may they be cut off, perish, or be annihilated!’
mn41:10.4 | S: They have wrong view. Their perspective is distorted: | T: Or he has wrong view, distorted vision, thus:
mn41:10.5 | S: ‘There’s no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There’s no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There’s no afterlife. There’s no such thing as mother and father, or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there’s no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ | T: ‘There is nothing given, nothing offered, nothing sacrificed; no fruit or result of good and bad actions; no this world, no other world; no mother, no father; no beings who are reborn spontaneously; no good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who have themselves realised by direct knowledge and declare this world and the other world.’
mn41:10.6 | S: This is how unprincipled and immoral conduct is threefold by way of mind. | T: That is how there are three kinds of mental conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct.
mn41:10.7 | S: That’s how unprincipled and immoral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: So, householders, it is by reason of such conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, by reason of such unrighteous conduct that some beings here on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in states of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.
mn41:11.1 | S: Householders, principled and moral conduct is threefold by way of body, fourfold by way of speech, and threefold by way of mind. | T: “Householders, there are three kinds of bodily conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct. There are four kinds of verbal conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct. There are three kinds of mental conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct.
mn41:12.1 | S: And how is principled and moral conduct threefold by way of body? | T: “And how, householders, are there three kinds of bodily conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct?
mn41:12.2 | S: It’s when someone gives up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. They’re scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for all living beings. | T: Here someone, abandoning the killing of living beings, abstains from killing living beings; with rod and weapon laid aside, gentle and kindly, he abides compassionate to all living beings.
mn41:12.3 | S: They give up stealing. They don’t, with the intention to commit theft, take the wealth or belongings of others from village or wilderness. | T: Abandoning the taking of what is not given, he abstains from taking what is not given; he does not take by way of theft the wealth and property of others in the village or in the forest.
mn41:12.4 | S: They give up sexual misconduct. They don’t have relations with women who have their mother, father, both mother and father, brother, sister, relatives, or clan as guardian. They don’t have relations with a woman who is protected on principle, or who has a husband, or whose violation is punishable by law, or even one who has been garlanded as a token of betrothal. | T: Abandoning misconduct in sensual pleasures, he abstains from misconduct in sensual pleasures; he does not have intercourse with women who are protected by their mother, father, mother and father, brother, sister, or relatives, who have a husband, who are protected by law, or with those who are garlanded in token of betrothal.
mn41:12.5 | S: This is how principled and moral conduct is threefold by way of body. | T: That is how there are three kinds of bodily conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct.
mn41:13.1 | S: And how is principled and moral conduct fourfold by way of speech? | T: “And how, householders, are there four kinds of verbal conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct?
mn41:13.2 | S: It’s when someone gives up lying. They’re summoned to a council, an assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to bear witness: ‘Please, my friend, say what you know.’ Not knowing, they say ‘I don’t know.’ Knowing, they say ‘I know.’ Not seeing, they say ‘I don’t see.’ And seeing, they say ‘I see.’ So they don’t deliberately lie for the sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly reason. | T: Here someone, abandoning false speech, abstains from false speech; when summoned to a court, or to a meeting, or to his relatives’ presence, or to his guild, or to the royal family’s presence, and questioned as a witness thus: ‘So, good man, tell what you know,’ not knowing, he says, ‘I do not know,’ or knowing, he says, ‘I know’; not seeing, he says, ‘I do not see,’ or seeing, he says, ‘I see’; he does not in full awareness speak falsehood for his own ends, or for another’s ends, or for some trifling worldly end.
mn41:13.3 | S: They give up backbiting. They don’t repeat in one place what they heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead, they reconcile those who are divided and support those who are united, delighting in harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony. | T: Abandoning malicious speech, he abstains from malicious speech; he does not repeat elsewhere what he has heard here in order to divide those people from these, nor does he repeat to these people what he has heard elsewhere in order to divide these people from those; thus he is one who reunites those who are divided, a promoter of friendships, who enjoys concord, rejoices in concord, delights in concord, a speaker of words that promote concord.
mn41:13.4 | S: They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way that’s mellow, pleasing to the ear, endearing, going to the heart, polite, likable, and agreeable to the people. | T: Abandoning harsh speech, he abstains from harsh speech; he speaks such words as are gentle, pleasing to the ear, and loveable, as go to the heart, are courteous, desired by many, and agreeable to many.
mn41:13.5 | S: They give up talking nonsense. Their words are timely, true, and meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. They say things at the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial. | T: Abandoning gossip, he abstains from gossip; he speaks at the right time, speaks what is fact, speaks on what is good, speaks on the Dhamma and the Discipline; at the right time he speaks such words as are worth recording, reasonable, moderate, and beneficial.
mn41:13.6 | S: This is how principled and moral conduct is fourfold by way of speech. | T: That is how there are four kinds of verbal conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct.
