## mn104
mn104:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
mn104:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans near the village of Sāma. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was living in the Sakyan country at Sāmagāma.
mn104:2.1 | S: Now at that time the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan had recently passed away at Pāvā. | T: Now on that occasion the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta had just died at Pāvā.
mn104:2.2 | S: With his passing the Jain ascetics split, dividing into two factions, fighting, quarreling, and disputing, continually wounding each other with barbed words: | T: On his death the Nigaṇṭhas divided, split into two; and they had taken to quarrelling and brawling and were deep in disputes, stabbing each other with verbal daggers:
mn104:2.3 | S: “You don’t understand this teaching and training. I understand this teaching and training. What, you understand this teaching and training? You’re practicing wrong. I’m practicing right. I stay on topic, you don’t. You said last what you should have said first. You said first what you should have said last. What you’ve thought so much about has been disproved. Your doctrine is refuted. Go on, save your doctrine! You’re trapped; get yourself out of this—if you can!” | T: “You do not understand this Dhamma and Discipline. I understand this Dhamma and Discipline. How could you understand this Dhamma and Discipline? Your way is wrong. My way is right. I am consistent. You are inconsistent. What should have been said first you said last. What should have been said last you said first. What you had so carefully thought up has been turned inside out. Your assertion has been shown up. You are refuted. Go and learn better, or disentangle yourself if you can!”
mn104:2.4 | S: You’d think there was nothing but slaughter going on among the Jain ascetics. | T: It seemed as if there were nothing but slaughter among the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta’s pupils.
mn104:2.5 | S: And the Jain Ñātika’s white-clothed lay disciples were disillusioned, dismayed, and disappointed in the Jain ascetics. They were equally disappointed with a teaching and training so poorly explained and poorly propounded, not emancipating, not leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha, with broken monument and without a refuge. | T: And his white-clothed lay disciples were disgusted, dismayed, and disappointed with the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta’s pupils, as they were with his badly proclaimed and badly expounded Dhamma and Discipline, which was unemancipating, unconducive to peace, expounded by one not fully enlightened, and was now with its shrine broken, left without a refuge.
mn104:3.1 | S: And then, after completing the rainy season residence near Pāvā, the novice Cunda went to see Venerable Ānanda at Sāma village. He bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. | T: Then the novice Cunda, who had spent the Rains at Pāvā, went to the venerable Ānanda, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and told him what was taking place.
mn104:4.1 | S: Ānanda said to him, | T: The venerable Ānanda then said to the novice Cunda:
mn104:4.2 | S: “Reverend Cunda, we should see the Buddha about this matter. | T: “Friend Cunda, this is news that should be told to the Blessed One.
mn104:4.3 | S: Come, let’s go to the Buddha and inform him about this.” | T: Come, let us approach the Blessed One and tell him this.”
mn104:4.4 | S: “Yes, sir,” replied Cunda. | T: “Yes, venerable sir,” the novice Cunda replied.
mn104:4.5 | S: Then Ānanda and Cunda went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and Ānanda informed him of what Cunda had said. He went on to say, | T: Then the venerable Ānanda and the novice Cunda went together to the Blessed One. After paying homage to him, they sat down at one side, and the venerable Ānanda said to the Blessed One:
mn104:4.6 | P: “ayaṁ, bhante, cundo samaṇuddeso evamāha: | T: “This novice Cunda, venerable sir, says thus:
mn104:4.7 | P: ‘nigaṇṭho, bhante, nāṭaputto pāvāyaṁ adhunākālaṅkato. | T: ‘Venerable sir, the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta has just died.
mn104:4.8 | P: Tassa kālaṅkiriyāya bhinnā nigaṇṭhā dvedhikajātā …pe… bhinnathūpe appaṭisaraṇe’ti. | T: On his death the Nigaṇṭhas divided, split into two…and is now with its shrine broken, left without a refuge.’
mn104:4.9 | S: “Sir, it occurs to me: | T: I thought, venerable sir:
mn104:4.10 | S: ‘When the Buddha has passed away, let no dispute arise in the Saṅgha. | T: ‘Let no dispute arise in the Sangha when the Blessed One has gone.
mn104:4.11 | S: For such a dispute would be for the detriment and unhappiness of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans.’” | T: For such a dispute would be for the harm and unhappiness of many, for the loss, harm, and suffering of gods and humans.’”
mn104:5.1 | S: “What do you think, Ānanda? | T: “What do you think, Ānanda?
mn104:5.2 | S: Do you see even two mendicants whose opinion differs regarding the things I have taught from my direct knowledge, that is, | T: These things that I have taught you after directly knowing them—that is,
mn104:5.3 | S: the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, the four right efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven awakening factors, and the noble eightfold path?” | T: the four foundations of mindfulness, the four right kinds of striving, the four bases for spiritual power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven enlightenment factors, the Noble Eightfold Path—do you see, Ānanda, even two bhikkhus who make differing assertions about these things?”
mn104:5.4 | S: “No, sir, I do not. | T: “No, venerable sir,
mn104:5.5 | P: cattāro satipaṭṭhānā cattāro sammappadhānā cattāro iddhipādā pañcindriyāni pañca balāni satta bojjhaṅgā ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo, nāhaṁ passāmi imesu dhammesu dvepi bhikkhū nānāvāde. | T: I do not see even two bhikkhus who make differing assertions about these things.
mn104:5.6 | S: Nevertheless, there are some individuals who appear to live obedient to the Buddha, but when the Buddha has passed away they might create a dispute in the Saṅgha regarding livelihood or the monastic code. | T: But, venerable sir, there are people who live deferential towards the Blessed One who might, when he has gone, create a dispute in the Sangha about livelihood and about the Pātimokkha.
mn104:5.7 | S: Such a dispute would be for the detriment and unhappiness of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans.” | T: Such a dispute would be for the harm and unhappiness of many, for the loss, harm, and suffering of gods and humans.”
mn104:5.8 | S: “Ānanda, dispute about livelihood or the monastic code is a minor matter. | T: “A dispute about livelihood or about the Pātimokkha would be trifling, Ānanda.
mn104:5.9 | S: But should a dispute arise in the Saṅgha concerning the path or the practice, that would be for the detriment and unhappiness of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. | T: But should a dispute arise in the Sangha about the path or the way, such a dispute would be for the harm and unhappiness of many, for the loss, harm, and suffering of gods and humans.
mn104:6.1 | S: Ānanda, there are these six roots of dispute. | T: “There are, Ānanda, these six roots of disputes.
mn104:6.2 | S: What six? | T: What six?
mn104:6.3 | S: Firstly, a mendicant is irritable and acrimonious. | T: Here, Ānanda, a bhikkhu is angry and resentful.
mn104:6.4 | S: Such a mendicant lacks respect and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and they don’t fulfill the training. | T: Such a bhikkhu dwells disrespectful and undeferential towards the Teacher, towards the Dhamma, and towards the Sangha, and he does not fulfil the training.
mn104:6.5 | S: They create a dispute in the Saṅgha, which is for the detriment and unhappiness of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. | T: A bhikkhu who dwells disrespectful and undeferential towards the Teacher, towards the Dhamma, and towards the Sangha, and who does not fulfil the training, creates a dispute in the Sangha, which would be for the harm and unhappiness of many, for the loss, harm, and suffering of gods and humans.
mn104:6.6 | S: If you see such a root of dispute in yourselves or others, you should try to give up this bad thing. | T: Now if you see any such root of dispute either in yourselves or externally, you should strive to abandon that same evil root of dispute.
mn104:6.7 | S: If you don’t see it, you should practice so that it doesn’t come up in the future. | T: And if you do not see any such root of dispute either in yourselves or externally, you should practise in such a way that that same evil root of dispute does not erupt in the future.
mn104:6.8 | S: That’s how to give up this bad root of dispute, so it doesn’t come up in the future. | T: Thus there is the abandoning of that evil root of dispute; thus there is the non-eruption of that evil root of dispute in the future.
mn104:7-11.1 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant is offensive and contemptuous … | T: “Again, a bhikkhu is contemptuous and insolent…envious and avaricious…fraudulent and deceitful…has evil wishes and wrong view…adheres to his own views,
mn104:7-11.2 | S: They’re jealous and stingy … | T: (none)
mn104:7-11.3 | S: They’re devious and deceitful … | T: (none)
mn104:7-11.4 | S: They have corrupt wishes and wrong view … | T: (none)
mn104:7-11.5 | S: They’re attached to their own views, holding them tight, and refusing to let go. | T: holds on to them tenaciously, and relinquishes them with difficulty.
mn104:7-11.6 | S: Such a mendicant lacks respect and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and they don’t fulfill the training. | T: Such a bhikkhu dwells disrespectful and undeferential towards the Teacher, towards the Dhamma, and towards the Sangha, and he does not fulfil the training.
mn104:7-11.7 | S: They create a dispute in the Saṅgha, which is for the detriment and unhappiness of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. | T: A bhikkhu who dwells disrespectful and undeferential towards the Teacher, towards the Dhamma, and towards the Sangha, and who does not fulfil the training, creates a dispute in the Sangha, which would be for the harm and unhappiness of many, for the loss, harm, and suffering of gods and humans.
mn104:7-11.8 | S: If you see such a root of dispute in yourselves or others, you should try to give up this bad thing. | T: Now if you see any such root of dispute either in yourselves or externally, you should strive to abandon that same evil root of dispute.
mn104:7-11.9 | S: If you don’t see it, you should practice so that it doesn’t come up in the future. | T: And if you do not see any such root of dispute either in yourselves or externally, you should practise in such a way that that same evil root of dispute does not erupt in the future.
mn104:7-11.10 | S: That’s how to give up this bad root of dispute, so it doesn’t come up in the future. | T: Thus there is the abandoning of that evil root of dispute; thus there is the non-eruption of that evil root of dispute in the future.
mn104:7-11.11 | S: These are the six roots of dispute. | T: These are the six roots of dispute.
mn104:12.1 | S: There are four kinds of disciplinary issues. | T: “Ānanda, there are these four kinds of litigation.
mn104:12.2 | S: What four? | T: What four?
mn104:12.3 | S: Disciplinary issues due to disputes, accusations, offenses, or business. | T: Litigation because of a dispute, litigation because of an accusation, litigation because of an offence, and litigation concerning proceedings.
mn104:12.4 | S: These are the four kinds of disciplinary issues. | T: These are the four kinds of litigation.
mn104:13.1 | S: There are these seven means of settling any disciplinary issues that might arise. | T: “Ānanda, there are these seven kinds of settlement of litigation. For the settlement and pacification of litigations whenever they arise:
mn104:13.2 | S: Resolution face-to-face to be applied. Resolution through recollection to be granted. Resolution because of past insanity to be granted. Acting according to what has been admitted. Majority decision. Further penalty. Covering over as if with grass. | T: removal of litigation by confrontation may be provided, removal of litigation on account of memory may be provided, removal of litigation on account of past insanity may be provided, the effecting of acknowledgement of an offence, the opinion of the majority, the pronouncement of bad character against someone, and covering over with grass.
mn104:14.1 | S: And how is there resolution face-to-face? | T: “And how is there removal of litigation by confrontation?
mn104:14.2 | S: It’s when mendicants are disputing: ‘This is the teaching,’ ‘This is not the teaching,’ ‘This is the monastic law,’ ‘This is not the monastic law.’ | T: Here bhikkhus are disputing: ‘It is Dhamma,’ or ‘It is not Dhamma,’ or ‘It is Discipline,’ or ‘It is not Discipline.’
mn104:14.3 | S: Those mendicants should all sit together in harmony | T: Those bhikkhus should all meet together in concord.
mn104:14.4 | S: and thoroughly go over the guidelines of the teaching. | T: Then, having met together, the guideline of the Dhamma should be drawn out.
mn104:14.5 | S: They should settle that disciplinary issue in agreement with the guidelines. | T: Once the guideline of the Dhamma has been drawn out, that litigation should be settled in a way that accords with it.
mn104:14.6 | S: That’s how there is resolution face-to-face. | T: Such is the removal of litigation by confrontation.
mn104:14.7 | S: And that’s how certain disciplinary issues are settled, that is, | T: And so there comes to be the settlement of some litigations here by removal of litigation by confrontation.
mn104:14.8 | S: by resolution face-to-face. | T: (none)
mn104:15.1 | S: And how is there majority decision? | T: “And how is there the opinion of a majority?
mn104:15.2 | S: If those mendicants are not able to settle that issue in that monastery, | T: If those bhikkhus cannot settle that litigation in that dwelling place,
mn104:15.3 | S: they should go to another monastery with more mendicants. | T: they should go to a dwelling place where there is a greater number of bhikkhus.
mn104:15.4 | S: There they should all sit together in harmony | T: There they should all meet together in concord.
mn104:15.5 | S: and thoroughly go over the guidelines of the teaching. | T: Then, having met together, the guideline of the Dhamma should be drawn out.
mn104:15.6 | S: They should settle that disciplinary issue in agreement with the guidelines. | T: Once the guideline of the Dhamma has been drawn out, that litigation should be settled in a way that accords with it.
mn104:15.7 | S: That’s how there is majority decision. And that’s how certain disciplinary issues are settled, that is, | T: Such is the opinion of a majority. And so there comes to be the settlement of some litigations here by the opinion of a majority.
mn104:15.8 | S: by majority decision. | T: (none)
mn104:16.1 | S: And how is there resolution through recollection? | T: “And how is there removal of litigation on account of memory?
mn104:16.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant accuses a mendicant of a heavy offense; one entailing expulsion, or close to it: | T: Here one bhikkhu reproves another bhikkhu for such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat:
mn104:16.3 | S: ‘Venerable, do you recall committing the kind of serious offense that entails expulsion or close to it?’ | T: ‘Does the venerable one remember having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat?’
mn104:16.4 | S: They say: | T: He says:
mn104:16.5 | S: ‘No, reverend, I don’t recall committing such an offense.’ | T: ‘I do not, friends, remember having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat.’
mn104:16.6 | S: The resolution through recollection should be granted to them. | T: In his case removal of litigation on account of memory should be pronounced.
mn104:16.7 | S: That’s how there is the resolution through recollection. And that’s how certain disciplinary issues are settled, that is, | T: Such is the removal of litigation on account of memory.
mn104:16.8 | S: by resolution through recollection. | T: And so there comes to be the settlement of some litigations here by removal of litigation on account of memory.
mn104:17.1 | S: And how is there resolution because of past insanity? | T: “And how is there removal of litigation on account of past insanity?
mn104:17.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant accuses a mendicant of the kind of serious offense that entails expulsion, or close to it: | T: Here one bhikkhu reproves another bhikkhu for such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat:
mn104:17.3 | S: ‘Venerable, do you recall committing the kind of serious offense that entails expulsion or close to it?’ | T: ‘Does the venerable one remember having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat?’
mn104:17.4 | S: They say: | T: He says:
mn104:17.5 | S: ‘No, reverend, I don’t recall committing such an offense.’ | T: ‘I do not, friends, remember having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat.’
mn104:17.6 | S: But though they try to get out of it, the mendicant pursues the issue: | T: Despite the denial, the former presses the latter further:
mn104:17.7 | S: ‘Surely the venerable must know perfectly well if you recall committing an offense that entails expulsion or close to it!’ | T: ‘Surely the venerable one must know quite well if he remembers having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat?’
mn104:17.8 | S: They say: | T: He says:
mn104:17.9 | S: ‘Reverend, I had gone mad, I was out of my mind. | T: ‘I had gone mad, friend, I was out of my mind,
mn104:17.10 | S: And while I was mad I did and said many things that are not proper for an ascetic. | T: and when I was mad I said and did many things improper for a recluse.
mn104:17.11 | S: I don’t remember any of that, | T: I do not remember,
mn104:17.12 | S: I was mad when I did it.’ | T: I was mad when I did that.’
mn104:17.13 | S: The resolution because of past insanity should be granted to them. | T: In his case removal of litigation on account of past insanity should be pronounced.
mn104:17.14 | S: That’s how there is resolution because of past insanity. And that’s how certain disciplinary issues are settled, that is, | T: Such is the removal of litigation on account of past insanity.
mn104:17.15 | S: by resolution because of past insanity. | T: And so there comes to be the settlement of some litigations here by removal of litigation on account of past insanity.
mn104:18.1 | S: And how is there acting according to what has been admitted? | T: “And how is there the effecting of acknowledgement of an offence?
mn104:18.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant, whether accused or not, recalls an offense and clarifies it and reveals it. | T: Here a bhikkhu, whether reproved or unreproved, remembers an offence, reveals it, and discloses it.
mn104:18.3 | S: After approaching a more senior mendicant, that mendicant should arrange his robe over one shoulder, bow to that mendicant’s feet, squat on their heels, raise their cupped palms, and say: | T: He should go to a senior bhikkhu, and after arranging his robe on one shoulder, he should pay homage at his feet. Then, sitting on his heels, he should raise his hands palms together and say:
mn104:18.4 | S: ‘Sir, I have fallen into such-and-such an offense. I confess it.’ | T: ‘Venerable sir, I have committed such and such an offence; I confess it.’
mn104:18.5 | S: The senior mendicant says: | T: The other says:
mn104:18.6 | S: ‘Do you see it?’ | T: ‘Do you see?’—
mn104:18.7 | S: ‘Yes, I see it.’ | T: ‘Yes, I see.’—
mn104:18.8 | S: ‘Then restrain yourself in future.’ | T: ‘Will you practise restraint in the future?’—
mn104:18.9 | S: ‘I shall restrain myself.’ | T: ‘I will practise restraint in the future.’
mn104:18.10 | S: That’s how there is acting according to what has been admitted. And that’s how certain disciplinary issues are settled, that is, | T: Such is the effecting of acknowledgement of an offence. And so there comes to be the settlement of some litigations here by the effecting of acknowledgement of an offence.
mn104:18.11 | S: by acting according to what has been admitted. | T: (none)
mn104:19.1 | S: And how is there a verdict of further penalty? | T: “And how is there the pronouncement of bad character against someone?
mn104:19.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant accuses a mendicant of the kind of heavy offense that entails expulsion, or close to it: | T: Here one bhikkhu reproves another for such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat:
mn104:19.3 | S: ‘Venerable, do you recall committing the kind of heavy offense that entails expulsion or close to it?’ | T: ‘Does the venerable one remember having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat?’
mn104:19.4 | S: They say: | T: He says:
mn104:19.5 | S: ‘No, reverend, I don’t recall committing such an offense.’ | T: ‘I do not, friends, remember having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat.’
mn104:19.6 | S: But though they try to get out of it, the mendicant pursues the issue: | T: Despite the denial, the former presses the latter further:
mn104:19.7 | S: ‘Surely the venerable must know perfectly well if you recall committing an offense that entails expulsion or close to it!’ | T: ‘Surely the venerable one must know quite well if he remembers having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat?’
mn104:19.8 | S: They say: | T: He says:
mn104:19.9 | S: ‘Reverend, I don’t recall committing a heavy offense of that nature. | T: ‘I do not, friends, remember having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat.
mn104:19.10 | S: But I do recall committing a light offense.’ | T: But, friends, I remember having committed such and such a minor offence.’
mn104:19.11 | S: But though they try to get out of it, the mendicant pursues the issue: | T: Despite the denial, the former presses the latter further:
mn104:19.12 | S: ‘Surely the venerable must know perfectly well if you recall committing an offense that entails expulsion or close to it!’ | T: ‘Surely the venerable one must know quite well if he remembers having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat?’
mn104:19.13 | S: They say: | T: He says:
mn104:19.14 | S: ‘Reverend, I’ll go so far as to admit this light offense even when not asked. | T: ‘Friends, when not asked I acknowledge having committed this minor offence;
mn104:19.15 | S: Why wouldn’t I admit a heavy offense when asked?’ | T: so when asked, why shouldn’t I acknowledge having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat?’
mn104:19.16 | S: They say: | T: The other says:
mn104:19.17 | S: ‘You wouldn’t have admitted that light offense without being asked, so why would you admit a heavy offense? | T: ‘Friend, if you had not been asked, you would not have acknowledged committing this minor offence; so why, when asked, would you acknowledge having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat?
mn104:19.18 | S: Surely the venerable must know perfectly well if you recall committing an offense that entails expulsion or close to it!’ | T: Surely the venerable one must know quite well if he remembers having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat?’
mn104:19.19 | S: They say: | T: He says:
mn104:19.20 | S: ‘Reverend, I do recall committing the kind of heavy offense that entails expulsion or close to it. | T: ‘I remember, friends, having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat.
mn104:19.21 | S: I spoke too hastily when I said | T: I was joking, I was raving, when I said that I did not remember having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat.’
mn104:19.22 | S: that I didn’t recall it.’ | T: (none)
mn104:19.23 | S: That’s how there is further penalty. And that’s how certain disciplinary issues are settled, that is, | T: Such is the pronouncement of bad character against someone. And so there comes to be the settlement of some litigations here by the pronouncement of bad character against someone.
mn104:19.24 | S: by further penalty. | T: (none)
mn104:20.1 | S: And how is there the covering over as if with grass? | T: “And how is there covering over with grass?
mn104:20.2 | S: It’s when the mendicants continually fight, quarrel, and dispute, doing and saying many things that are not proper for an ascetic. | T: Here when bhikkhus have taken to quarreling and brawling and are deep in disputes, they may have said and done many things improper for a recluse.
mn104:20.3 | S: Those mendicants should all sit together in harmony. | T: Those bhikkhus should all meet together in concord.
mn104:20.4 | S: A competent mendicant of one party, having risen from their seat, arranged their robe over one shoulder, and raised their cupped palms, should inform the Saṅgha: | T: When they have met together, a wise bhikkhu among the bhikkhus who side together on the one part should rise from his seat, and after arranging his robe on one shoulder, he should raise his hands, palms together, and call for an enactment of the Sangha thus:
mn104:20.5 | S: ‘Sir, let the Saṅgha listen to me. | T: ‘Let the venerable Sangha hear me.
mn104:20.6 | S: We have been continually fighting, quarreling, and disputing, doing and saying many things that are not proper for an ascetic. | T: When we took to quarreling and brawling and were deep in disputes, we said and did many things improper for a recluse.
mn104:20.7 | S: If it seems appropriate to the Saṅgha, then—for the benefit of these venerables and myself—I disclose in the middle of the Saṅgha by means of covering over as if with grass any offenses committed by these venerables and by myself, excepting only those that are gravely blameworthy and those connected with laypeople.’ | T: If it is approved by the Sangha, then for the good of these venerable ones and for my own good, in the midst of the Sangha I shall confess, by the method of covering over with grass, any offences of these venerable ones and any offences of my own, except for those which call for serious censure and those connected with the laity.’
mn104:20.8 | S: Then a competent mendicant of the other party, having risen from their seat, arranged their robe over one shoulder, and raising their cupped palms, should inform the Saṅgha: | T: “Then a wise bhikkhu among the bhikkhus who side together on the other part should rise from his seat, and after arranging his robe on one shoulder, he should raise his hands, palms together, and call for an enactment of the Sangha thus:
mn104:20.9 | S: ‘Sir, let the Saṅgha listen to me. | T: ‘Let the venerable Sangha hear me.
mn104:20.10 | S: We have been continually fighting, quarreling, and disputing, doing and saying many things that are not proper for an ascetic. | T: When we took to quarreling and brawling and were deep in disputes, we said and did many things improper for a recluse.
mn104:20.11 | S: If it seems appropriate to the Saṅgha, then—for the benefit of these venerables and myself—I disclose in the middle of the Saṅgha by means of covering over as if with grass any offenses committed by these venerables and by myself, excepting only those that are gravely blameworthy and those connected with laypeople.’ | T: If it is approved by the Sangha, then for the good of these venerable ones and for my own good, in the midst of the Sangha I shall confess, by the method of covering over with grass, any offences of these venerable ones and any offences of my own, except for those which call for serious censure and those connected with the laity.’
mn104:20.12 | S: That’s how there is the covering over as if with grass. And that’s how certain disciplinary issues are settled, that is, | T: Such is the covering over with grass. And so there comes to be the settlement of some litigations here by the covering over with grass.
mn104:20.13 | S: by covering over as if with grass. | T: (none)
mn104:21.1 | S: Ānanda, these six warm-hearted qualities make for fondness and respect, conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without quarreling. | T: “Ānanda, there are these six principles of cordiality that create love and respect, and conduce to cohesion, to non-dispute, to concord, and to unity.
mn104:21.2 | S: What six? | T: What are the six?
mn104:21.3 | S: Firstly, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions with bodily kindness, both in public and in private. | T: “Here a bhikkhu maintains bodily acts of loving-kindness both in public and in private towards his companions in the holy life.
mn104:21.4 | S: This warm-hearted quality makes for fondness and respect, conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without dispute. | T: This is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect, and conduces to cohesion, to non-dispute, to concord, and to unity.
mn104:21.5 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions with verbal kindness … | T: “Again, a bhikkhu maintains verbal acts of loving-kindness both in public and in private towards his companions in the holy life.
mn104:21.6 | S: This too is a warm-hearted quality. | T: This too is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect, and conduces to…unity.
mn104:21.7 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions with mental kindness … | T: “Again, a bhikkhu maintains mental acts of loving-kindness both in public and in private towards his companions in the holy life.
mn104:21.8 | S: This too is a warm-hearted quality. | T: This too is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect, and conduces to…unity.
mn104:21.9 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant shares without reservation any material things they have gained by legitimate means, even the food placed in the alms-bowl, using them in common with their ethical spiritual companions. | T: “Again, a bhikkhu enjoys things in common with his virtuous companions in the holy life; without making reservations, he shares with them any gain of a kind that accords with the Dhamma and has been obtained in a way that accords with the Dhamma, including even what is in his bowl.
mn104:21.10 | S: This too is a warm-hearted quality. | T: This too is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect, and conduces to…unity.
mn104:21.11 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant lives according to the precepts shared with their spiritual companions, both in public and in private. Those precepts are intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. | T: “Again, a bhikkhu dwells both in public and in private possessing in common with his companions in the holy life those virtues that are unbroken, untorn, unblotched, unmottled, liberating, commended by the wise, not misapprehended, and conducive to concentration.
mn104:21.12 | S: This too is a warm-hearted quality. | T: This too is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect and conduces to…unity.
mn104:21.13 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant lives according to the view shared with their spiritual companions, both in public and in private. That view is noble and emancipating, and delivers one who applies it to the complete ending of suffering. | T: “Again, a bhikkhu dwells both in public and in private possessing in common with his companions in the holy life that view that is noble and emancipating, and leads the one who practises in accordance with it to the complete destruction of suffering.
mn104:21.14 | S: This too is a warm-hearted quality. | T: This too is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect, and conduces to cohesion, to non-dispute, to concord, and to unity.
mn104:21.15 | S: These six warm-hearted qualities make for fondness and respect, conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without dispute. | T: “These are the six principles of cordiality that create love and respect, and conduce to cohesion, to non-dispute, to concord, and to unity.
mn104:22.1 | S: If you should proceed having undertaken these six warm-hearted qualities, do you see any criticism, large or small, that you could not endure?” | T: “If, Ānanda, you undertake and maintain these six principles of cordiality, do you see any course of speech, trivial or gross, that you could not endure?”—
mn104:22.2 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “No, venerable sir.”—
mn104:22.3 | S: “That’s why, Ānanda, you should proceed having undertaken these six warm-hearted qualities. | T: “Therefore, Ānanda, undertake and maintain these six principles of cordiality.
mn104:22.4 | S: That will be for your lasting welfare and happiness.” | T: That will lead to your welfare and happiness for a long time.”
mn104:22.5 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: That is what the Blessed One said.
mn104:22.6 | S: Satisfied, Venerable Ānanda approved what the Buddha said. | T: The venerable Ānanda was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.

## sn35.247
sn35.247:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, suppose a person with wounded and festering limbs was to enter a thicket of reeds. | T: “Bhikkhus, suppose a man with limbs wounded and festering would enter a wood of thorny reeds,
sn35.247:1.2 | S: The kusa thorns would pierce their feet, and the reed leaves would scratch their limbs. | T: and the Kusa thorns would prick his feet and the reed blades would slash his limbs.
sn35.247:1.3 | S: And that would cause that person to experience even more pain and distress. | T: Thus that man would thereby experience even more pain and displeasure.
sn35.247:1.4 | S: In the same way, some mendicant goes to a village or a wilderness and gets scolded, | T: So too, bhikkhus, some bhikkhu here, gone to the village or the forest, meets someone who reproaches him thus:
sn35.247:1.5 | S: ‘This venerable, acting like this, behaving like this, is a filthy village thorn.’ | T: ‘This venerable one, acting in such a way, behaving in such a way, is a foul village thorn.’
sn35.247:1.6 | S: Understanding that they’re a thorn, they should understand restraint and lack of restraint. | T: Having understood him thus as a ‘thorn,’ one should understand restraint and nonrestraint.
sn35.247:2.1 | S: And how is someone unrestrained? | T: “And how, bhikkhus is there nonrestraint?
sn35.247:2.2 | S: Take a mendicant who sees a sight with their eyes. If it’s pleasant they hold on to it, but if it’s unpleasant they dislike it. They live with mindfulness of the body unestablished and their heart stunted. | T: Here, having seen a form with the eye, a bhikkhu is intent upon a pleasing form and repelled by a displeasing form. He dwells without having set up mindfulness of the body, with a limited mind,
sn35.247:2.3 | S: And they don’t truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without remainder. | T: and he does not understand as it really is that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, wherein those evil unwholesome states cease without remainder.
sn35.247:2.4 | S: When they hear a sound with their ears … | T: Having heard a sound with the ear …
sn35.247:2.5 | S: When they smell an odor with their nose … | T: (none)
sn35.247:2.6 | S: When they taste a flavor with their tongue … | T: (none)
sn35.247:2.7 | S: When they feel a touch with their body … | T: (none)
sn35.247:2.8 | S: When they know an idea with their mind, if it’s pleasant they hold on to it, but if it’s unpleasant they dislike it. They live with mindfulness of the body unestablished and their heart stunted. | T: Having cognized a mental phenomenon with the mind, he is intent upon a pleasing mental phenomenon and repelled by a displeasing mental phenomenon. He dwells without having set up mindfulness of the body, with a limited mind,
sn35.247:2.9 | S: And they don’t truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without remainder. | T: and he does not understand as it really is that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, wherein those evil unwholesome states cease without remainder.
sn35.247:3.1 | S: Suppose a person was to catch six animals, with diverse territories and feeding grounds, and tie them up with a strong rope. | T: “Suppose, bhikkhus, a man would catch six animals—with different domains and different feeding grounds—and tie them by a strong rope.
sn35.247:3.2 | S: They’d catch a snake, | T: He would catch a snake,
sn35.247:3.3 | S: a dolphin, | T: a crocodile,
sn35.247:3.4 | S: a bird, | T: a bird,
sn35.247:3.5 | S: a dog, | T: a dog,
sn35.247:3.6 | S: a jackal, | T: a jackal,
sn35.247:3.7 | S: and a monkey, | T: and a monkey,
sn35.247:3.8 | S: tie each up with a strong rope, then tie a knot in the middle and let them loose. | T: and tie each by a strong rope. Having done so, he would tie the ropes together with a knot in the middle and release them.
sn35.247:3.9 | S: Then those six animals with different domains and ranges would each pull toward their own domain and range. | T: Then those six animals with different domains and different feeding grounds would each pull in the direction of its own feeding ground and domain.
sn35.247:3.10 | S: The snake would pull one way, thinking ‘I’m going into a termite mound!’ The dolphin would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m going into the water!’ The bird would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m flying into the atmosphere!’ The dog would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m going into the village!’ The jackal would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m going into the charnel ground!’ The monkey would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m going into the jungle!’ | T: The snake would pull one way, thinking, ‘Let me enter an anthill.’ The crocodile would pull another way, thinking, ‘Let me enter the water.’ The bird would pull another way, thinking, ‘Let me fly up into the sky.’ The dog would pull another way, thinking, ‘Let me enter a village.’ The jackal would pull another way, thinking, ‘Let me enter a charnel ground.’ The monkey would pull another way, thinking, ‘Let me enter a forest.’
sn35.247:3.11 | S: When those six animals became exhausted and worn out, the strongest of them would get their way, and they’d all have to submit to their control. | T: “Now when these six animals become worn out and fatigued, they would be dominated by the one among them that was strongest; they would submit to it and come under its control.
sn35.247:3.12 | S: In the same way, when a mendicant has not developed or cultivated mindfulness of the body, their eye pulls toward pleasant sights, but is put off by unpleasant sights. Their ear … nose … tongue … body … | T: So too, bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu has not developed and cultivated mindfulness directed to the body, the eye pulls in the direction of agreeable forms and disagreeable forms are repulsive; the ear pulls in the direction of agreeable sounds and disagreeable sounds are repulsive; the nose pulls in the direction of agreeable odours and disagreeable odours are repulsive; the tongue pulls in the direction of agreeable tastes and disagreeable tastes are repulsive; the body pulls in the direction of agreeable tactile objects and disagreeable tactile objects are repulsive;
sn35.247:3.13 | S: mind pulls toward pleasant ideas, but is put off by unpleasant ideas. | T: the mind pulls in the direction of agreeable mental phenomena and disagreeable mental phenomena are repulsive.
sn35.247:3.14 | S: This is how someone is unrestrained. | T: “It is in such a way that there is nonrestraint.
sn35.247:4.1 | S: And how is someone restrained? | T: “And how, bhikkhus, is there restraint?
sn35.247:4.2 | S: Take a mendicant who sees a sight with their eyes. If it’s pleasant they don’t hold on to it, and if it’s unpleasant they don’t dislike it. They live with mindfulness of the body established and a limitless heart. | T: Here, having seen a form with the eye, a bhikkhu is not intent upon a pleasing form and not repelled by a displeasing form. He dwells having set up mindfulness of the body, with a measureless mind,
sn35.247:4.3 | S: And they truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without remainder. | T: and he understands as it really is that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, wherein those evil unwholesome states cease without remainder.
sn35.247:4.4 | S: They hear a sound … smell an odor … taste a flavor … feel a touch … | T: Having heard a sound with the ear …
sn35.247:4.5 | S: know an idea with their mind. If it’s pleasant they don’t hold on to it, and if it’s unpleasant they don’t dislike it. They live with mindfulness of the body established and a limitless heart. | T: Having cognized a mental phenomenon with the mind, he is not intent upon a pleasing mental phenomenon and not repelled by a displeasing mental phenomenon. He dwells having set up mindfulness of the body, with a measureless mind,
sn35.247:4.6 | S: And they truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without remainder. | T: and he understands as it really is that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, wherein those evil unwholesome states cease without remainder. It is in such a way that there is restraint.
sn35.247:5.1 | S: Suppose a person was to catch six animals, with diverse territories and feeding grounds, and tie them up with a strong rope. | T: “Suppose, bhikkhus, a man would catch six animals—with different domains and different feeding grounds—and tie them by a strong rope.
sn35.247:5.2 | S: They’d catch a snake, | T: He would catch a snake,
sn35.247:5.3 | S: a dolphin, | T: a crocodile,
sn35.247:5.4 | S: a bird, | T: a bird,
sn35.247:5.5 | S: a dog, | T: a dog,
sn35.247:5.6 | S: a jackal, | T: a jackal,
sn35.247:5.7 | S: and a monkey, | T: and a monkey,
sn35.247:5.8 | S: tie each up with a strong rope, then tether them to a strong post or pillar. | T: and tie each by a strong rope. Having done so, he would bind them to a strong post or pillar.
sn35.247:5.9 | S: Then those six animals with different domains and ranges would each pull toward their own domain and range. | T: Then those six animals with different domains and different feeding grounds would each pull in the direction of its own feeding ground and domain.
sn35.247:5.10 | S: The snake would pull one way, thinking ‘I’m going into a termite mound!’ The dolphin would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m going into the water!’ The bird would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m flying into the atmosphere!’ The dog would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m going into the village!’ The jackal would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m going into the charnel ground!’ The monkey would pull another way, thinking ‘I’m going into the jungle!’ | T: The snake would pull one way, thinking, ‘Let me enter an anthill’ … as above … The monkey would pull another way, thinking, ‘Let me enter a forest.’
sn35.247:5.11 | S: When those six animals became exhausted and worn out, they’d stand or sit or lie down right by that post or pillar. | T: “Now when these six animals become worn out and fatigued, they would stand close to that post or pillar, they would sit down there, they would lie down there.
sn35.247:5.12 | S: In the same way, when a mendicant has developed and cultivated mindfulness of the body, their eye doesn’t pull toward pleasant sights, and isn’t put off by unpleasant sights. Their ear … nose … tongue … body … | T: So too, bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu has developed and cultivated mindfulness directed to the body, the eye does not pull in the direction of agreeable forms nor are disagreeable forms repulsive; the ear does not pull in the direction of agreeable sounds nor are disagreeable sounds repulsive; the nose does not pull in the direction of agreeable odours nor are disagreeable odours repulsive; the tongue does not pull in the direction of agreeable tastes nor are disagreeable tastes repulsive; the body does not pull in the direction of agreeable tactile objects nor are disagreeable tactile objects repulsive;
sn35.247:5.13 | S: mind doesn’t pull toward pleasant ideas, and isn’t put off by unpleasant ideas. | T: the mind does not pull in the direction of agreeable mental phenomena nor are disagreeable mental phenomena repulsive.
sn35.247:5.14 | S: This is how someone is restrained. | T: “It is in such a way that there is restraint.
sn35.247:6.1 | S: ‘A strong post or pillar’ is a term for mindfulness of the body. | T: “‘A strong post or pillar’: this, bhikkhus, is a designation for mindfulness directed to the body.
sn35.247:6.2 | S: So you should train like this: | T: Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus:
sn35.247:6.3 | S: ‘We will develop mindfulness of the body. We’ll cultivate it, make it our vehicle and our basis, keep it up, consolidate it, and properly implement it.’ | T: ‘We will develop and cultivate mindfulness directed to the body, make it our vehicle, make it our basis, stabilize it, exercise ourselves in it, and fully perfect it.’
sn35.247:6.4 | S: That’s how you should train.” | T: Thus should you train yourselves.”

## an4.12
an4.12:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, live by the ethical precepts and the monastic code. Live restrained in the monastic code, conducting yourselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, keep the rules you’ve undertaken. | T: “Bhikkhus, dwell observant of virtuous behavior, observant of the Pātimokkha. Dwell restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults. Having undertaken them, train in the training rules.
an4.12:1.2 | S: When you’ve done this, what more is there to do? | T: When you have done so, what further should be done?
an4.12:2.1 | S: Suppose a mendicant has got rid of desire and ill will while walking, and has given up dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. Their energy is roused up and unflagging, their mindfulness is established and lucid, their body is tranquil and undisturbed, and their mind is immersed and unified in samādhi. Such a mendicant is said to be ‘keen and prudent, always energetic and resolute’ when walking. | T: (1) “Bhikkhus, if a bhikkhu has gotten rid of longing and ill will while walking; if he has abandoned dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt; if his energy is aroused without slackening; if his mindfulness is established and unmuddled; if his body is tranquil and undisturbed; if his mind is concentrated and one-pointed, then that bhikkhu is said to be ardent and to dread wrongdoing; he is constantly and continuously energetic and resolute while walking.
an4.12:3.1 | S: Suppose a mendicant has got rid of desire and ill will while standing … | T: (2) “If a bhikkhu has gotten rid of longing and ill will while standing … (3) If a bhikkhu has gotten rid of longing and ill will while sitting …
an4.12:4.1 | S: sitting … | T: …
an4.12:5.1 | S: or when lying down while awake, and has given up dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. Their energy is roused up and unflagging, their mindfulness is established and lucid, their body is tranquil and undisturbed, and their mind is immersed and unified in samādhi. Such a mendicant is said to be ‘keen and prudent, always energetic and resolute’ when lying down while awake. | T: (4) If a bhikkhu has gotten rid of longing and ill will while wakefully lying down; if he has abandoned dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt; if his energy is aroused without slackening; if his mindfulness is established and unmuddled; if his body is tranquil and undisturbed; if his mind is concentrated and one-pointed, then that bhikkhu is said to be ardent and to dread wrongdoing; he is constantly and continuously energetic and resolute while wakefully lying down.”
an4.12:6.1 | S: Carefully walking, carefully standing, | T: Controlled in walking, controlled in standing,
an4.12:6.2 | S: carefully sitting, carefully lying; | T: controlled in sitting and in lying down;
an4.12:6.3 | S: a mendicant carefully bends their limbs, | T: controlled, a bhikkhu draws in the limbs,
an4.12:6.4 | S: and carefully extends them. | T: and controlled, he stretches them out.
an4.12:7.1 | S: Above, below, all round, | T: Above, across, and below,
an4.12:7.2 | S: as far as the planet extends; | T: as far as the world extends,
an4.12:7.3 | S: they scrutinize the rise and fall | T: he is one who scrutinizes the arising and vanishing
an4.12:7.4 | S: of phenomena such as the aggregates. | T: of such phenomena as the aggregates.
an4.12:8.1 | S: Training in what leads to serenity of heart, | T: Training in what is conducive to serenity of mind,
an4.12:8.2 | S: always staying mindful; | T: always mindful,
an4.12:8.3 | S: they call such a mendicant | T: they call such a bhikkhu one constantly resolute.
an4.12:8.4 | S: ‘always determined’.” | T: (none)

## an5.42
an5.42:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, a true person is born in a family for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of the people. | T: “Bhikkhus, when a good person is born in a family, it is for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people.
an5.42:1.2 | S: For the benefit, welfare, and happiness of mother and father; | T: It is for the good, welfare, and happiness of (1) his mother and father,
an5.42:1.3 | S: children and partners; | T: (2) his wife and children,
an5.42:1.4 | S: bondservants, workers, and staff; | T: (3) his slaves, workers, and servants,
an5.42:1.5 | S: friends and colleagues; | T: (4) his friends and companions,
an5.42:1.6 | S: and ascetics and brahmins. | T: and (5) ascetics and brahmins.
an5.42:2.1 | S: It’s like a great rain cloud, which nourishes all the crops for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of the people. | T: Just as a great rain cloud, nurturing all the crops, appears for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people,
an5.42:2.2 | S: In the same way, a true person is born in a family for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of the people. … | T: so too, when a good person is born in a family, it is for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people.
an5.42:2.3 | P: mātāpitūnaṁ atthāya hitāya sukhāya hoti; | T: It is for the good, welfare, and happiness of his mother and father …
an5.42:2.7 | P: samaṇabrāhmaṇānaṁ atthāya hitāya sukhāya hotīti. | T: ascetics and brahmins.”
an5.42:3.1 | S: The gods protect one who is guarded by principle, | T: The deities protect one guarded by the Dhamma,
an5.42:3.2 | S: who uses their wealth for the welfare of the many. | T: who has managed his wealth for the welfare of many.
an5.42:3.3 | S: One who is learned, <j>with precepts and observances intact, | T: Fame does not forsake one steadfast in the Dhamma, who is learned and of virtuous behavior and observances.
an5.42:3.4 | S: and steady in principle, doesn’t lose their reputation. | T: Who is fit to blame him, standing in Dhamma,
an5.42:4.1 | S: Firm in principle, accomplished in ethical conduct, | T: accomplished in virtuous behavior,
an5.42:4.2 | S: truthful, conscientious; | T: a speaker of truth, possessing a sense of shame,
an5.42:4.3 | S: like a pendant of Black Plum River gold, | T: pure like a coin of refined gold?
an5.42:4.4 | S: who is worthy to criticize them? | T: (none)
an5.42:4.5 | S: Even the gods praise them, | T: Even the devas praise him;
an5.42:4.6 | S: and by the Divinity, too, they’re praised.” | T: by Brahmā, too, he is praised.

