## mn60
mn60:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
mn60:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he arrived at a village of the Kosalan brahmins named Sālā. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering in the Kosalan country with a large Sangha of bhikkhus, and eventually he arrived at a Kosalan brahmin village named Sālā.
mn60:2.1 | S: The brahmins and householders of Sālā heard: | T: The brahmin householders of Sālā heard:
mn60:2.2 | S: “It seems the ascetic Gotama—a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family—wandering in the land of the Kosalans has arrived at Sālā, together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants. | T: “The recluse Gotama, the son of the Sakyans who went forth from a Sakyan clan, has been wandering in the Kosalan country with a large Sangha of bhikkhus and has come to Sālā.
mn60:2.3 | S: He has this good reputation: | T: Now a good report of Master Gotama has been spread to this effect:
mn60:2.4 | S: ‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ | T: ‘That Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened, blessed.
mn60:2.5 | S: He has realized with his own insight this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—and he makes it known to others. | T: He declares this world with its gods, its Māras, and its Brahmās, this generation with its recluses and brahmins, its princes and its people, which he has himself realised with direct knowledge.
mn60:2.6 | S: He teaches Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. | T: He teaches the Dhamma good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing, and he reveals a holy life that is utterly perfect and pure.’
mn60:2.7 | S: It’s good to see such perfected ones.” | T: Now it is good to see such arahants.”
mn60:3.1 | S: Then the brahmins and householders of Sālā went up to the Buddha. Before sitting down to one side, some bowed, some exchanged greetings and polite conversation, some held up their cupped palms toward the Buddha, some announced their name and clan, while some kept silent. The Buddha said to them: | T: Then the brahmin householders of Sālā went to the Blessed One. Some paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down at one side; some exchanged greetings with him, and when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, sat down at one side; some extended their hands in reverential salutation towards the Blessed One and sat down at one side; some pronounced their name and clan in the Blessed One’s presence and sat down at one side; some kept silent and sat down at one side. When they were seated, the Blessed One asked them:
mn60:4.1 | S: “So, householders, is there any teacher you’re happy with, in whom you have acquired grounded faith?” | T: “Householders, is there any teacher agreeable to you in whom you have acquired faith supported by reasons?”
mn60:4.2 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “No, venerable sir, there is no teacher agreeable to us in whom we have acquired faith supported by reasons.”
mn60:4.3 | S: “Since you haven’t found a teacher you’re happy with, you should undertake and implement this sure bet teaching. | T: “Since, householders, you have not found an agreeable teacher, you may undertake and practise this incontrovertible teaching;
mn60:4.4 | S: For when the sure bet teaching is undertaken, it will be for your lasting welfare and happiness. | T: for when the incontrovertible teaching is accepted and undertaken, it will lead to your welfare and happiness for a long time.
mn60:4.5 | S: And what is the sure bet teaching? | T: And what is the incontrovertible teaching?
mn60:5.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: | T: i. The Doctrine of Nihilism A “Householders, there are some recluses and brahmins whose doctrine and view is this:
mn60:5.2 | S: ‘There’s no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There’s no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There’s no afterlife. There’s no such thing as mother and father, or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there’s no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ | T: ‘There is nothing given, nothing offered, nothing sacrificed; no fruit or result of good and bad actions; no this world, no other world; no mother, no father; no beings who are reborn spontaneously; no good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who have themselves realised by direct knowledge and declare this world and the other world.’
mn60:6.1 | S: And there are some ascetics and brahmins whose doctrine directly contradicts this. | T: B “Now there are some recluses and brahmins whose doctrine is directly opposed to that of those recluses and brahmins,
mn60:6.2 | S: They say: | T: and they say thus:
mn60:6.3 | S: ‘There is meaning in giving, sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother and father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ | T: ‘There is what is given and what is offered and what is sacrificed; there is fruit and result of good and bad actions; there is this world and the other world; there is mother and father; there are beings who are reborn spontaneously; there are good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who have themselves realised by direct knowledge and declare this world and the other world.’
mn60:6.4 | S: What do you think, householders? | T: What do you think, householders?
mn60:6.5 | S: Don’t these doctrines directly contradict each other?” | T: Don’t these recluses and brahmins hold doctrines directly opposed to each other?”—
mn60:6.6 | S: “Yes, sir.” | T: “Yes, venerable sir.”
mn60:7.1 | S: “Since this is so, consider those ascetics and brahmins whose view is that | T: A.i “Now, householders, of those recluses and brahmins whose doctrine and view is this:
mn60:7.2 | S: there’s no meaning in giving, etc. | T: ‘There is nothing given…no good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who have themselves realised by direct knowledge and declare this world and the other world,’
mn60:7.3 | S: You can expect that they will shun good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and undertake and implement bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: it is to be expected that they will avoid these three wholesome states, namely, good bodily conduct, good verbal conduct, and good mental conduct, and that they will undertake and practise these three unwholesome states, namely, bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, and mental misconduct.
mn60:7.4 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn60:7.5 | S: Because those ascetics and brahmins don’t see that unskillful qualities are full of drawbacks, sordidness, and corruption, or that skillful qualities have the benefit and cleansing power of renunciation. | T: Because those good recluses and brahmins do not see in unwholesome states the danger, degradation, and defilement, nor do they see in wholesome states the blessing of renunciation, the aspect of cleansing.
mn60:8.1 | S: Moreover, since there actually is another world, their view that there is no other world is wrong view. | T: A.ii “Since there actually is another world, one who holds the view ‘there is no other world’ has wrong view.
mn60:8.2 | S: Since there actually is another world, their thought that there is no other world is wrong purpose. | T: Since there actually is another world, one who intends ‘there is no other world’ has wrong intention.
mn60:8.3 | S: Since there actually is another world, their speech that there is no other world is wrong speech. | T: Since there actually is another world, one who makes the statement ‘there is no other world’ has wrong speech.
mn60:8.4 | S: Since there actually is another world, in saying that there is no other world they contradict those perfected ones who know the other world. | T: Since there actually is another world, one who says ‘there is no other world’ is opposed to those arahants who know the other world.
mn60:8.5 | S: Since there actually is another world, in persuading another that there is no other world they are persuading them to accept an untrue teaching. | T: Since there actually is another world, one who convinces another ‘there is no other world’ convinces him to accept an untrue Dhamma;
mn60:8.6 | S: And on account of that they glorify themselves and put others down. | T: and because he convinces another to accept an untrue Dhamma, he praises himself and disparages others.
mn60:8.7 | S: So they give up their former ethical conduct and are established in unethical conduct. | T: Thus any pure virtue that he formerly had is abandoned and corrupt conduct is substituted.
mn60:8.8 | S: And that is how these many bad, unskillful qualities come to be with wrong view as condition—wrong view, wrong purpose, wrong speech, contradicting the noble ones, persuading others to accept untrue teachings, and glorifying oneself and putting others down. | T: And this wrong view, wrong intention, wrong speech, opposition to noble ones, convincing another to accept an untrue Dhamma, and self-praise and disparagement of others—these several evil unwholesome states thus come into being with wrong view as their condition.
mn60:9.1 | S: A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: | T: A.iii “About this a wise man considers thus:
mn60:9.2 | S: ‘If there is no other world, when this individual person’s body breaks up they will keep themselves safe. | T: ‘If there is no other world, then on the dissolution of the body this good person will have made himself safe enough.
mn60:9.3 | S: And if there is another world, when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: But if there is another world, then on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.
mn60:9.4 | S: But let us grant that those who say that there is no other world are correct. | T: Now whether or not the word of those good recluses and brahmins is true, let me assume that there is no other world:
mn60:9.5 | S: Regardless, that individual is still criticized by sensible people in this very life as being an immoral individual of wrong view, a nihilist.’ | T: still this good person is here and now censured by the wise as an immoral person, one of wrong view who holds the doctrine of nihilism.
mn60:9.6 | S: But if there really is another world, they hold a losing hand on both counts. | T: But on the other hand, if there is another world, then this good person has made an unlucky throw on both counts:
mn60:9.7 | S: For they are criticized by sensible people in this very life, and when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: since he is censured by the wise here and now, and since on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.
mn60:9.8 | S: They have wrongly undertaken this sure bet teaching in such a way that it encompasses the positive outcomes of one side only, leaving out the skillful premise. | T: He has wrongly accepted and undertaken this incontrovertible teaching in such a way that it extends only to one side and excludes the wholesome alternative.’
mn60:10.1 | S: Since this is so, consider those ascetics and brahmins whose view is that | T: B.i “Now, householders, of those recluses and brahmins whose doctrine and view is this:
mn60:10.2 | S: there is meaning in giving, etc. | T: ‘There is what is given…there are good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who have themselves realised by direct knowledge and declare this world and the other world,’
mn60:10.3 | S: You can expect that they will shun bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and undertake and implement good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: it is to be expected that they will avoid these three unwholesome states, namely, bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, and mental misconduct, and that they will undertake and practise these three wholesome states, namely, good bodily conduct, good verbal conduct, and good mental conduct.
mn60:10.4 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn60:10.5 | S: Because those ascetics and brahmins see that unskillful qualities are full of drawbacks, sordidness, and corruption, and that skillful qualities have the benefit and cleansing power of renunciation. | T: Because those good recluses and brahmins see in unwholesome states the danger, degradation, and defilement, and they see in wholesome states the blessing of renunciation, the aspect of cleansing.
mn60:11.1 | S: Moreover, since there actually is another world, their view that there is another world is right view. | T: B.ii “Since there actually is another world, one who holds the view ‘there is another world’ has right view.
mn60:11.2 | S: Since there actually is another world, their thought that there is another world is right purpose. | T: Since there actually is another world, one who intends ‘there is another world’ has right intention.
mn60:11.3 | S: Since there actually is another world, their speech that there is another world is right speech. | T: Since there actually is another world, one who makes the statement ‘there is another world’ has right speech.
mn60:11.4 | S: Since there actually is another world, in saying that there is another world they don’t contradict those perfected ones who know the other world. | T: Since there actually is another world, one who says ‘there is another world’ is not opposed to those arahants who know the other world.
mn60:11.5 | S: Since there actually is another world, in persuading another that there is another world they are persuading them to accept a true teaching. | T: Since there actually is another world, one who convinces another ‘there is another world’ convinces him to accept true Dhamma;
mn60:11.6 | S: And on account of that they don’t glorify themselves or put others down. | T: and because he convinces another to accept true Dhamma, he does not praise himself and disparage others.
mn60:11.7 | S: So they give up their former unethical conduct and are established in ethical conduct. | T: Thus any corrupt conduct that he formerly had is abandoned and pure virtue is substituted.
mn60:11.8 | S: And that is how these many skillful qualities come to be with right view as condition—right view, right purpose, right speech, not contradicting the noble ones, persuading others to accept true teachings, and not glorifying oneself or putting others down. | T: And this right view, right intention, right speech, non-opposition to noble ones, convincing another to accept true Dhamma, and avoidance of self-praise and disparagement of others—these several wholesome states thus come into being with right view as their condition.
mn60:12.1 | S: A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: | T: B.iii “About this a wise man considers thus:
mn60:12.2 | S: ‘If there is another world, when this individual’s body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. | T: ‘If there is another world, then on the dissolution of the body, after death, this good person will reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.
mn60:12.3 | S: But let us grant that those who say that there is no other world are correct. | T: Now whether or not the word of those good recluses and brahmins is true, let me assume that there is no other world:
mn60:12.4 | S: Regardless, that individual is still praised by sensible people in this very life as being a moral individual of right view, who affirms a positive teaching.’ | T: still this good person is here and now praised by the wise as a virtuous person, one with right view who holds the doctrine of affirmation.
mn60:12.5 | S: So if there really is another world, they hold a winning hand on both counts. | T: And on the other hand, if there is another world, then this good person has made a lucky throw on both counts:
mn60:12.6 | S: For they are praised by sensible people in this very life, and when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. | T: since he is praised by the wise here and now, and since on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.
mn60:12.7 | S: They have rightly undertaken this sure bet teaching in such a way that it encompasses the positive outcomes of both sides, leaving out the unskillful premise. | T: He has rightly accepted and undertaken this incontrovertible teaching in such a way that it extends to both sides and excludes the unwholesome alternative.’
mn60:13.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: | T: ii. The Doctrine of Non-Doing A “Householders, there are some recluses and brahmins whose doctrine and view is this:
mn60:13.2 | S: ‘The one who acts does nothing wrong when they punish, mutilate, torture, aggrieve, oppress, intimidate, or when they encourage others to do the same. They do nothing wrong when they kill, steal, break into houses, plunder wealth, steal from isolated buildings, commit highway robbery, commit adultery, and lie. | T: ‘When one acts or makes others act, when one mutilates or makes others mutilate, when one tortures or makes others inflict torture, when one inflicts sorrow or makes others inflict sorrow, when one oppresses or makes others inflict oppression, when one intimidates or makes others inflict intimidation, when one kills living beings, takes what is not given, breaks into houses, plunders wealth, commits burglary, ambushes highways, seduces another’s wife, utters falsehood—
mn60:13.3 | S: If you were to reduce all the living creatures of this earth to one heap and mass of flesh with a razor-edged chakram, no evil comes of that, and no outcome of evil. | T: no evil is done by the doer. If, with a razor-rimmed wheel, one were to make the living beings on this earth into one mass of flesh, into one heap of flesh, because of this there would be no evil and no outcome of evil.
mn60:13.4 | S: If you were to go along the south bank of the Ganges killing, mutilating, and torturing, and encouraging others to do the same, no evil comes of that, and no outcome of evil. | T: If one were to go along the south bank of the Ganges killing and slaughtering, mutilating and making others mutilate, torturing and making others inflict torture, because of this there would be no evil and no outcome of evil.
mn60:13.5 | S: If you were to go along the north bank of the Ganges giving and sacrificing and encouraging others to do the same, no merit comes of that, and no outcome of merit. | T: If one were to go along the north bank of the Ganges giving gifts and making others give gifts, making offerings and making others make offerings, because of this there would be no merit and no outcome of merit.
mn60:13.6 | S: In giving, self-control, restraint, and truthfulness there is no merit or outcome of merit.’ | T: By giving, by taming oneself, by restraint, by speaking truth, there is no merit and no outcome of merit.’
mn60:14.1 | S: And there are some ascetics and brahmins whose doctrine directly contradicts this. They say: | T: B “Now there are some recluses and brahmins whose doctrine is directly opposed to that of those recluses and brahmins, and they say thus:
mn60:14.2 | S: ‘The one who acts does a bad deed when they punish, mutilate, torture, aggrieve, oppress, intimidate, or when they encourage others to do the same. They do a bad deed when they kill, steal, break into houses, plunder wealth, steal from isolated buildings, commit highway robbery, commit adultery, and lie. | T: ‘When one acts or makes others act, when one mutilates or makes others mutilate…utters falsehood—evil is done by the doer.
mn60:14.3 | S: If you were to reduce all the living creatures of this earth to one heap and mass of flesh with a razor-edged chakram, evil comes of that, and an outcome of evil. | T: If, with a razor-rimmed wheel, one were to make the living beings on this earth into one mass of flesh, into one heap of flesh, because of this there would be evil and the outcome of evil.
mn60:14.4 | S: If you were to go along the south bank of the Ganges killing, mutilating, and torturing, and encouraging others to do the same, evil comes of that, and an outcome of evil. | T: If one were to go along the south bank of the Ganges killing and slaughtering, mutilating and making others mutilate, torturing and making others inflict torture, because of this there would be evil and the outcome of evil.
mn60:14.5 | S: If you were to go along the north bank of the Ganges giving and sacrificing and encouraging others to do the same, merit comes of that, and an outcome of merit. | T: If one were to go along the north bank of the Ganges giving gifts and making others give gifts, making offerings and making others make offerings, because of this there would be merit and the outcome of merit.
mn60:14.6 | S: In giving, self-control, restraint, and truthfulness there is merit and outcome of merit.’ | T: By giving, by taming oneself, by restraint, by speaking truth, there is merit and the outcome of merit.’
mn60:14.7 | S: What do you think, householders? | T: What do you think, householders?
mn60:14.8 | S: Don’t these doctrines directly contradict each other?” | T: Don’t these recluses and brahmins hold doctrines directly opposed to each other?”—
mn60:14.9 | S: “Yes, sir.” | T: “Yes, venerable sir.”
mn60:15.1 | S: “Since this is so, consider those ascetics and brahmins whose view is that | T: A.i “Now, householders, of those recluses and brahmins whose doctrine and view is this:
mn60:15.2 | S: the one who acts does nothing wrong when they punish, etc. | T: ‘When one acts or makes others act…there is no merit and no outcome of merit,’
mn60:15.5 | S: You can expect that they will shun good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and undertake and implement bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: it is to be expected that they will avoid these three wholesome states, namely, good bodily conduct, good verbal conduct and good mental conduct, and that they will undertake and practise these three unwholesome states, namely, bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, and mental misconduct.
mn60:15.6 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn60:15.7 | S: Because those ascetics and brahmins don’t see that unskillful qualities are full of drawbacks, sordidness, and corruption, or that skillful qualities have the benefit and cleansing power of renunciation. | T: Because those good recluses and brahmins do not see in unwholesome states the danger, degradation, and defilement, nor do they see in wholesome states the blessing of renunciation, the aspect of cleansing.
mn60:16.1 | S: Moreover, since action actually does have an effect, their view that action is ineffective is wrong view. | T: A.ii “Since there actually is doing, one who holds the view ‘there is no doing’ has wrong view.
mn60:16.2 | S: Since action actually does have an effect, their thought that action is ineffective is wrong purpose. | T: Since there actually is doing, one who intends ‘there is no doing’ has wrong intention.
mn60:16.3 | S: Since action actually does have an effect, their speech that action is ineffective is wrong speech. | T: Since there actually is doing, one who makes the statement ‘there is no doing’ has wrong speech.
mn60:16.4 | S: Since action actually does have an effect, in saying that action is ineffective they contradict those perfected ones who teach that action is effective. | T: Since there actually is doing, one who says ‘there is no doing’ is opposed to those arahants who hold the doctrine that there is doing.
mn60:16.5 | S: Since action actually does have an effect, in persuading another that action is ineffective they are persuading them to accept an untrue teaching. | T: Since there actually is doing, one who convinces another ‘there is no doing’ convinces him to accept an untrue Dhamma;
mn60:16.6 | S: And on account of that they glorify themselves and put others down. | T: and because he convinces another to accept an untrue Dhamma, he praises himself and disparages others.
mn60:16.7 | S: So they give up their former ethical conduct and are established in unethical conduct. | T: Thus any pure virtue that he formerly had is abandoned and corrupt conduct is substituted.
mn60:16.8 | S: And that is how these many bad, unskillful qualities come to be with wrong view as condition—wrong view, wrong purpose, wrong speech, contradicting the noble ones, persuading others to accept untrue teachings, and glorifying oneself and putting others down. | T: And this wrong view, wrong intention, wrong speech, opposition to noble ones, convincing another to accept an untrue Dhamma, and self-praise and disparagement of others—these several evil unwholesome states thus come into being with wrong view as their condition.
mn60:17.1 | S: A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: | T: A.iii “About this a wise man considers thus:
mn60:17.2 | S: ‘If there is no effective action, when this individual’s body breaks up they will keep themselves safe. | T: ‘If there is no doing, then on the dissolution of the body this good person will have made himself safe enough.
mn60:17.3 | S: And if there is effective action, when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: But if there is doing, then on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.
mn60:17.4 | S: But let us grant that those who say that there is no effective action are correct. | T: Now whether or not the word of those good recluses and brahmins is true, let me assume that there is no doing:
mn60:17.5 | S: Regardless, that individual is still criticized by sensible people in this very life as being an immoral individual of wrong view, one who denies the efficacy of action.’ | T: still this good person is here and now censured by the wise as an immoral person, one of wrong view who holds the doctrine of non-doing.
mn60:17.6 | S: But if there really is effective action, they hold a losing hand on both counts. | T: But on the other hand, if there is doing, then this good person has made an unlucky throw on both counts:
mn60:17.7 | S: For they are criticized by sensible people in this very life, and when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: since he is censured by the wise here and now, and since on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.
mn60:17.8 | S: They have wrongly undertaken this sure bet teaching in such a way that it encompasses the positive outcomes of one side only, leaving out the skillful premise. | T: He has wrongly accepted and undertaken this incontrovertible teaching in such a way that it extends only to one side and excludes the wholesome alternative.’
mn60:18.1 | S: Since this is so, consider those ascetics and brahmins whose view is that | T: B.i “Now, householders, of those recluses and brahmins whose doctrine and view is this:
mn60:18.2 | S: the one who acts does a bad deed when they punish, etc. | T: ‘When one acts or makes others act…there is merit and outcome of merit,’
mn60:18.6 | S: You can expect that they will shun bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and undertake and implement good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: it is to be expected that they will avoid these three unwholesome states, namely, bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, and mental misconduct, and that they will undertake and practise these three wholesome states, namely, good bodily conduct, good verbal conduct, and good mental conduct.
mn60:18.7 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn60:18.8 | S: Because those ascetics and brahmins see that unskillful qualities are full of drawbacks, sordidness, and corruption, and that skillful qualities have the benefit and cleansing power of renunciation. | T: Because those good recluses and brahmins see in unwholesome states the danger, degradation, and defilement, and they see in wholesome states the blessing of renunciation, the aspect of cleansing.
mn60:19.1 | S: Moreover, since action actually does have an effect, their view that action is effective is right view. | T: B.ii “Since there actually is doing, one who holds the view ‘there is doing’ has right view.
mn60:19.2 | S: Since action actually does have an effect, their thought that action is effective is right purpose. | T: Since there actually is doing, one who intends ‘there is doing’ has right intention.
mn60:19.3 | S: Since action actually does have an effect, their speech that action is effective is right speech. | T: Since there actually is doing, one who makes the statement ‘there is doing’ has right speech.
mn60:19.4 | S: Since action actually does have an effect, in saying that action is effective they don’t contradict those perfected ones who teach that action is effective. | T: Since there actually is doing, one who says ‘there is doing’ is not opposed to those arahants who hold the doctrine that there is doing.
mn60:19.5 | S: Since action actually does have an effect, in persuading another that action is effective they are persuading them to accept a true teaching. | T: Since there actually is doing, one who convinces another ‘there is doing’ convinces him to accept true Dhamma;
mn60:19.6 | S: And on account of that they don’t glorify themselves or put others down. | T: and because he convinces another to accept true Dhamma, he does not praise himself and disparage others.
mn60:19.7 | S: So they give up their former unethical conduct and are established in ethical conduct. | T: Thus any corrupt conduct that he formerly had is abandoned and pure virtue is substituted.
mn60:19.8 | S: And that is how these many skillful qualities come to be with right view as condition—right view, right purpose, right speech, not contradicting the noble ones, persuading others to accept true teachings, and not glorifying oneself or putting others down. | T: And this right view, right intention, right speech, non-opposition to noble ones, convincing another to accept true Dhamma, and avoidance of self-praise and disparagement of others—these several wholesome states thus come into being with right view as their condition.
mn60:20.1 | S: A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: | T: B.iii “About this a wise man considers thus:
mn60:20.2 | S: ‘If there is effective action, when this individual’s body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. | T: ‘If there is doing, then on the dissolution of the body, after death, this good person will reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.
mn60:20.3 | S: But let us grant that those who say that there is no effective action are correct. | T: Now whether or not the word of those good recluses and brahmins is true, let me assume that there is no doing:
mn60:20.4 | S: Regardless, that individual is still praised by sensible people in this very life as being a moral individual of right view, who affirms the efficacy of action.’ | T: still this good person is here and now praised by the wise as a virtuous person, one with right view who holds the doctrine of doing.
mn60:20.5 | S: So if there really is effective action, they hold a winning hand on both counts. | T: And on the other hand, if there is doing, then this good person has made a lucky throw on both counts:
mn60:20.6 | S: For they are praised by sensible people in this very life, and when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. | T: since he is praised by the wise here and now, and since on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.
mn60:20.7 | S: They have rightly undertaken this sure bet teaching in such a way that it encompasses the positive outcomes of both sides, leaving out the unskillful premise. | T: He has rightly accepted and undertaken this incontrovertible teaching in such a way that it extends to both sides and excludes the unwholesome alternative.’
mn60:21.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: | T: iii. The Doctrine of Non-Causality A “Householders, there are some recluses and brahmins whose doctrine and view is this:
mn60:21.2 | S: ‘There is no cause or reason for the corruption of sentient beings. | T: ‘There is no cause or condition for the defilement of beings;
mn60:21.3 | S: Sentient beings are corrupted without cause or reason. | T: beings are defiled without cause or condition.
mn60:21.4 | S: There’s no cause or reason for the purification of sentient beings. | T: There is no cause or condition for the purification of beings;
mn60:21.5 | S: Sentient beings are purified without cause or reason. | T: beings are purified without cause or condition.
mn60:21.6 | S: There is no power, no energy, no human strength or vigor. | T: There is no power, no energy, no manly strength, no manly endurance.
mn60:21.7 | S: All sentient beings, all living creatures, all beings, all souls lack control, power, and energy. Molded by destiny, circumstance, and nature, they experience pleasure and pain in the six classes of rebirth.’ | T: All beings, all living things, all creatures, all souls are without mastery, power, and energy; moulded by destiny, circumstance, and nature, they experience pleasure and pain in the six classes.’
mn60:22.1 | S: And there are some ascetics and brahmins whose doctrine directly contradicts this. | T: B “Now there are some recluses and brahmins whose doctrine is directly opposed to that of those recluses and brahmins,
mn60:22.2 | S: They say: | T: and they say thus:
mn60:22.3 | S: ‘There is a cause and reason for the corruption of sentient beings. | T: ‘There is a cause and condition for the defilement of beings;
mn60:22.4 | S: Sentient beings are corrupted with cause and reason. | T: beings are defiled owing to a cause and condition.
mn60:22.5 | S: There is a cause and reason for the purification of sentient beings. | T: There is a cause and condition for the purification of beings;
mn60:22.6 | S: Sentient beings are purified with cause and reason. | T: beings are purified owing to a cause and condition.
mn60:22.7 | S: There is power, energy, human strength and vigor. | T: There is power, energy, manly strength, manly endurance.
mn60:22.8 | S: It is not the case that all sentient beings, all living creatures, all beings, all souls lack control, power, and energy, or that, molded by destiny, circumstance, and nature, they experience pleasure and pain in the six classes of rebirth.’ | T: It is not the case that all beings, all living things, all creatures, all souls are without mastery, power, and energy, or that moulded by destiny, circumstance, and nature, they experience pleasure and pain in the six classes.’
mn60:22.9 | S: What do you think, householders? | T: What do you think, householders?
mn60:22.10 | S: Don’t these doctrines directly contradict each other?” | T: Don’t these recluses and brahmins hold doctrines directly opposed to each other?”—
mn60:22.11 | S: “Yes, sir.” | T: “Yes, venerable sir.”
mn60:23.1 | S: “Since this is so, consider those ascetics and brahmins whose view is that | T: A.i “Now, householders, of those recluses and brahmins whose doctrine and view is this:
mn60:23.2 | S: there’s no cause or reason for the corruption of sentient beings, etc. | T: ‘There is no cause or condition for the defilement of beings…they experience pleasure and pain in the six classes,’
mn60:23.7 | S: You can expect that they will shun good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and undertake and implement bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: it is to be expected that they will avoid these three wholesome states, namely, good bodily conduct, good verbal conduct, and good mental conduct, and that they will undertake and practise these three unwholesome states, namely, bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, and mental misconduct.
mn60:23.8 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn60:23.9 | S: Because those ascetics and brahmins don’t see that unskillful qualities are full of drawbacks, sordidness, and corruption, or that skillful qualities have the benefit and cleansing power of renunciation. | T: Because those good recluses and brahmins do not see in unwholesome states the danger, degradation, and defilement, nor do they see in wholesome states the blessing of renunciation, the aspect of cleansing.
mn60:24.1 | S: Moreover, since there actually is causality, their view that there is no causality is wrong view. | T: A.ii “Since there actually is causality, one who holds the view ‘there is no causality’ has wrong view.
mn60:24.2 | S: Since there actually is causality, their thought that there is no causality is wrong purpose. | T: Since there actually is causality, one who intends ‘there is no causality’ has wrong intention.
mn60:24.3 | S: Since there actually is causality, their speech that there is no causality is wrong speech. | T: Since there actually is causality, one who makes the statement ‘there is no causality’ has wrong speech.
mn60:24.4 | S: Since there actually is causality, in saying that there is no causality they contradict those perfected ones who teach that there is causality. | T: Since there actually is causality, one who says ‘there is no causality’ is opposed to those arahants who hold the doctrine of causality.
mn60:24.5 | S: Since there actually is causality, in persuading another that there is no causality they are persuading them to accept an untrue teaching. | T: Since there actually is causality, one who convinces another ‘there is no causality’ convinces him to accept an untrue Dhamma;
mn60:24.6 | S: And on account of that they glorify themselves and put others down. | T: and because he convinces another to accept an untrue Dhamma, he praises himself and disparages others.
mn60:24.7 | S: So they give up their former ethical conduct and are established in unethical conduct. | T: Thus any pure virtue that he formerly had is abandoned and corrupt conduct is substituted.
mn60:24.8 | S: And that is how these many bad, unskillful qualities come to be with wrong view as condition—wrong view, wrong purpose, wrong speech, contradicting the noble ones, persuading others to accept untrue teachings, and glorifying oneself and putting others down. | T: And this wrong view, wrong intention, wrong speech, opposition to noble ones, convincing another to accept an untrue Dhamma, and self-praise and disparagement of others—these several evil unwholesome states thus come into being with wrong view as their condition.
mn60:25.1 | S: A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: | T: A.iii “About this a wise man considers thus:
mn60:25.2 | S: ‘If there is no causality, when this individual’s body breaks up they will keep themselves safe. | T: ‘If there is no causality, then on the dissolution of the body this good person will have made himself safe enough.
mn60:25.3 | S: And if there is causality, when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: But if there is causality, then on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.
mn60:25.4 | S: But let us grant that those who say that there is no causality are correct. | T: Now whether or not the word of those good recluses and brahmins is true, let me assume that there is no causality:
mn60:25.5 | S: Regardless, that individual is still criticized by sensible people in this very life as being an immoral individual of wrong view, one who denies causality.’ | T: still this good person is here and now censured by the wise as an immoral person, one of wrong view who holds the doctrine of non-causality.
mn60:25.6 | S: But if there really is causality, they hold a losing hand on both counts. | T: But on the other hand, if there is causality, then this good person has made an unlucky throw on both counts:
mn60:25.7 | S: For they are criticized by sensible people in this very life, and when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: since he is censured by the wise here and now, and since on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.
mn60:25.8 | S: They have wrongly undertaken this sure bet teaching in such a way that it encompasses the positive outcomes of one side only, leaving out the skillful premise. | T: He has wrongly accepted and undertaken this incontrovertible teaching in such a way that it extends only to one side and excludes the wholesome alternative.’
mn60:26.1 | S: Since this is so, consider those ascetics and brahmins whose view is that | T: B.i “Now, householders, of those recluses and brahmins whose doctrine and view is this:
mn60:26.2 | S: there is a cause and reason for the corruption of sentient beings, etc. | T: ‘There is a cause and condition for the defilement of beings…they experience pleasure and pain in the six classes,’
mn60:26.7 | S: You can expect that they will shun bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and undertake and implement good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: it is to be expected that they will avoid these three unwholesome states, namely, bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, and mental misconduct, and that they will undertake and practise these three wholesome states, namely, good bodily conduct, good verbal conduct, and good mental conduct.
mn60:26.8 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn60:26.9 | S: Because those ascetics and brahmins see that unskillful qualities are full of drawbacks, sordidness, and corruption, and that skillful qualities have the benefit and cleansing power of renunciation. | T: Because those good recluses and brahmins see in unwholesome states the danger, degradation, and defilement, and they see in wholesome states the blessing of renunciation, the aspect of cleansing.
mn60:27.1 | S: Moreover, since there actually is causality, their view that there is causality is right view. | T: B.ii “Since there actually is causality, one who holds the view ‘there is causality’ has right view.
mn60:27.2 | S: Since there actually is causality, their thought that there is causality is right purpose. | T: Since there actually is causality, one who intends ‘there is causality’ has right intention.
mn60:27.3 | S: Since there actually is causality, their speech that there is causality is right speech. | T: Since there actually is causality, one who makes the statement ‘there is causality’ has right speech.
mn60:27.4 | S: Since there actually is causality, in saying that there is causality they don’t contradict those perfected ones who teach that there is causality. | T: Since there actually is causality, one who says ‘there is causality’ is not opposed to those arahants who hold the doctrine of causality. Since there actually is causality,
mn60:27.5 | S: Since there actually is causality, in persuading another that there is causality they are persuading them to accept a true teaching. | T: one who convinces another ‘there is causality’ convinces him to accept true Dhamma;
mn60:27.6 | S: And on account of that they don’t glorify themselves or put others down. | T: and because is he convinces another to accept true Dhamma, he does not praise himself and disparage others.
mn60:27.7 | S: So they give up their former unethical conduct and are established in ethical conduct. | T: Thus any corrupt conduct that he formerly had is abandoned and pure virtue is substituted.
mn60:27.8 | S: And that is how these many skillful qualities come to be with right view as condition—right view, right purpose, right speech, not contradicting the noble ones, persuading others to accept true teachings, and not glorifying oneself or putting others down. | T: And this right view, right intention, right speech, non-opposition to noble ones, convincing another to accept true Dhamma, and avoidance of self-praise and disparagement of others—these several wholesome states thus come into being with right view as their condition.
mn60:28.1 | S: A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: ‘If there is causality, when this individual’s body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. | T: B.iii “About this a wise man considers thus: ‘If there is causality, then on the dissolution of the body, after death, this good person will reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.
mn60:28.2 | S: But let us grant that those who say that there is no causality are correct. | T: Now whether or not the word of those good recluses and brahmins is true, let me assume that there is no causality:
mn60:28.3 | S: Regardless, that individual is still praised by sensible people in this very life as being a moral individual of right view, who affirms causality.’ | T: still this good person is here and now praised by the wise as a virtuous person, one with right view who holds the doctrine of causality.
mn60:28.4 | S: So if there really is causality, they hold a winning hand on both counts. | T: And on the other hand, if there is causality, then this good person has made a lucky throw on both counts:
mn60:28.5 | S: For they are praised by sensible people in this very life, and when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. | T: since he is praised by the wise here and now, and since on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.
mn60:28.6 | S: They have rightly undertaken this sure bet teaching in such a way that it encompasses the positive outcomes of both sides, leaving out the unskillful premise. | T: He has rightly accepted and undertaken this incontrovertible teaching in such a way that it extends to both sides and excludes the unwholesome alternative.’
mn60:29.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: | T: iv. There Are no Immaterial Realms “Householders, there are some recluses and brahmins whose doctrine and view is this:
mn60:29.2 | S: ‘There are no totally formless states of meditation.’ | T: ‘There are definitely no immaterial realms.’
mn60:30.1 | S: And there are some ascetics and brahmins whose doctrine directly contradicts this. | T: “Now there are some recluses and brahmins whose doctrine is directly opposed to that of those recluses and brahmins,
mn60:30.2 | S: They say: | T: and they say thus:
mn60:30.3 | S: ‘There are totally formless states of meditation.’ | T: ‘There definitely are immaterial realms.’
mn60:30.4 | S: What do you think, householders? | T: What do you think, householders?
mn60:30.5 | S: Don’t these doctrines directly contradict each other?” | T: Don’t these recluses and brahmins hold doctrines directly opposed to each other?”—
mn60:30.6 | S: “Yes, sir.” | T: “Yes, venerable sir.”
mn60:31.1 | S: “A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: | T: “About this a wise man considers thus:
mn60:31.2 | S: ‘Some ascetics and brahmins say that | T: ‘These good recluses and brahmins hold the doctrine and view
mn60:31.3 | S: there are no totally formless meditations, but I have not seen that. | T: “there are definitely no immaterial realms,” but that has not been seen by me.
mn60:31.4 | S: Some ascetics and brahmins say that | T: And these other good recluses and brahmins hold the doctrine and view
mn60:31.5 | S: there are totally formless meditations, but I have not known that. | T: “there definitely are immaterial realms,” but that has not been known by me.
mn60:31.6 | S: Without knowing or seeing, it would not be appropriate for me to take one side and declare, | T: If, without knowing and seeing, I were to take one side and declare:
mn60:31.7 | S: ‘This is the only truth, anything else is futile.’ | T: “Only this is true, anything else is wrong,” that would not be fitting for me.
mn60:31.8 | S: If those ascetics and brahmins who say that | T: Now as to the recluses and brahmins who hold the doctrine and view “there definitely are no immaterial realms,”
mn60:31.9 | S: there are no totally formless meditations are correct, it is possible | T: if their word is true then it is certainly still possible that I might reappear after death among the gods of the fine-material realms who consist of mind.
mn60:31.10 | S: that it’s a sure bet I will be reborn among the gods who are formed and made of mind. | T: (none)
mn60:31.11 | S: If those ascetics and brahmins who say that | T: But as to the recluses and brahmins who hold the doctrine and view “there definitely are immaterial realms,”
mn60:31.12 | S: there are totally formless meditations are correct, it is possible | T: if their word is true then it is certainly possible that I might reappear after death among the gods of the immaterial realms who consist of perception.
mn60:31.13 | S: that it’s a sure bet I will be reborn among the gods who are formless and made of perception. | T: (none)
mn60:31.14 | S: Now, owing to form, bad things are seen: taking up the rod and the sword, quarrels, arguments, and disputes, accusations, backbiting, and lies. | T: The taking up of rods and weapons, quarrels, brawls, disputes, recrimination, malice, and false speech are seen to occur based on material form,
mn60:31.15 | S: But those things don’t exist where it is totally formless.’ | T: but this does not exist at all in the immaterial realms.’
mn60:31.16 | S: Reflecting like this, they simply practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding forms. | T: After reflecting thus, he practises the way to disenchantment with material forms, to the fading away and cessation of material forms.
mn60:32.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: | T: V. There is no Cessation of Being “Householders, there are some recluses and brahmins whose doctrine and view is this:
mn60:32.2 | S: ‘There is no such thing as the total cessation of continued existence.’ | T: ‘There is definitely no cessation of being.’
mn60:33.1 | S: And there are some ascetics and brahmins whose doctrine directly contradicts this. | T: “Now there are some recluses and brahmins whose doctrine is directly opposed to that of those recluses and brahmins,
mn60:33.2 | S: They say: | T: and they say thus:
mn60:33.3 | S: ‘There is such a thing as the total cessation of continued existence.’ | T: ‘There definitely is a cessation of being.’
mn60:33.4 | S: What do you think, householders? | T: What do you think, householders?
mn60:33.5 | S: Don’t these doctrines directly contradict each other?” | T: Don’t these recluses and brahmins hold doctrines directly opposed to each other?”—
mn60:33.6 | S: “Yes, sir.” | T: “Yes, venerable sir.”
mn60:34.1 | S: “A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: | T: “About this a wise man considers thus:
mn60:34.2 | S: ‘Some ascetics and brahmins say that | T: ‘These good recluses and brahmins hold the doctrine and view
mn60:34.3 | S: there is no such thing as the total cessation of continued existence, but I have not seen that. | T: “there is definitely no cessation of being,” but that has not been seen by me.
mn60:34.4 | S: Some ascetics and brahmins say that | T: And these other good recluses and brahmins hold the doctrine and view
mn60:34.5 | S: there is such a thing as the total cessation of continued existence, but I have not known that. | T: “there definitely is a cessation of being,” but that has not been known by me.
mn60:34.6 | S: Without knowing or seeing, it would not be appropriate for me to take one side and declare, | T: If, without knowing and seeing, I were to take one side and declare:
mn60:34.7 | S: ‘This is the only truth, anything else is futile.’ | T: “Only this is true, anything else is wrong,” that would not be fitting for me.
mn60:34.8 | S: If those ascetics and brahmins who say that | T: Now as to the recluses and brahmins who hold the doctrine and view “there definitely is no cessation of being,”
mn60:34.9 | S: there is no such thing as the total cessation of continued existence are correct, it is possible | T: if their word is true then it is certainly still possible that I might reappear after death among the gods of the immaterial realms who consist of perception.
mn60:34.10 | S: that it’s a sure bet I will be reborn among the gods who are formless and made of perception. | T: (none)
mn60:34.11 | S: If those ascetics and brahmins who say that | T: But as to the recluses and brahmins who hold the doctrine and view “there definitely is a cessation of being,”
mn60:34.12 | S: there is such a thing as the total cessation of continued existence are correct, it is possible | T: if their word is true then it is possible that I might here and now attain final Nibbāna.
mn60:34.13 | S: that I will be fully extinguished in this very life. | T: (none)
mn60:34.14 | S: The view of those ascetics and brahmins who say that | T: The view of those good recluses and brahmins who hold the doctrine and view
mn60:34.15 | S: there is no such thing as the total cessation of continued existence is close to greed, yoking, relishing, attachment, and grasping. | T: “there definitely is no cessation of being” is close to lust, close to bondage, close to delighting, close to holding, close to clinging;
mn60:34.16 | S: The view of those ascetics and brahmins who say that | T: but the view of those good recluses and brahmins who hold the doctrine and view
mn60:34.17 | S: there is such a thing as the total cessation of continued existence is close to non-greed, non-yoking, non-relishing, non-attachment, and non-grasping.’ | T: “there definitely is cessation of being” is close to non-lust, close to non-bondage, close to non-delighting, close to non-holding, close to non-clinging.’
mn60:34.18 | S: Reflecting like this, they simply practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding future lives. | T: After reflecting thus, he practises the way to disenchantment with being, to the fading away and cessation of being.
mn60:35.1 | S: Householders, these four individuals are found in the world. | T: Four Kinds of Persons “Householders, there are four kinds of persons to be found existing in the world.
mn60:35.2 | S: What four? | T: What four?
mn60:35.3 | S: One individual mortifies themselves, committed to the practice of mortifying themselves. | T: Here a certain kind of person torments himself and pursues the practice of torturing himself.
mn60:35.4 | S: One individual mortifies others, committed to the practice of mortifying others. | T: Here a certain kind of person torments others and pursues the practice of torturing others.
mn60:35.5 | S: One individual mortifies themselves and others, committed to the practice of mortifying themselves and others. | T: Here a certain kind of person torments himself and pursues the practice of torturing himself, and he also torments others and pursues the practice of torturing others.
mn60:35.6 | S: One individual doesn’t mortify either themselves or others, committed to the practice of not mortifying themselves or others. | T: Here a certain kind of person does not torment himself or pursue the practice of torturing himself, and he does not torment others or pursue the practice of torturing others.
mn60:35.7 | S: They live without wishes in this very life, quenched, cooled, experiencing bliss, with self become divine. | T: Since he torments neither himself nor others, he is here and now hungerless, extinguished, and cooled, and he abides experiencing bliss, having himself become holy.
mn60:36.1 | S: And what individual mortifies themselves, committed to the practice of mortifying themselves? | T: “What kind of person, householders, torments himself and pursues the practice of torturing himself?
mn60:36.2 | S: It’s when a person goes naked, ignoring conventions. … | T: Here a certain person goes naked, rejecting conventions…as MN51,
mn60:36.3 | S: And so they live committed to practicing these various ways of mortifying and tormenting the body. | T: §8…Thus in such a variety of ways he dwells pursuing the practice of tormenting and mortifying the body.
mn60:36.4 | S: This is called an individual who mortifies themselves, being committed to the practice of mortifying themselves. | T: This is called the kind of person who torments himself and pursues the practice of torturing himself.
mn60:37.1 | S: And what individual mortifies others, committed to the practice of mortifying others? | T: “What kind of person, householders, torments others and pursues the practice of torturing others?
mn60:37.2 | S: It’s when an individual is a butcher of sheep, pigs, poultry, or deer, a hunter or fisher, a bandit, an executioner, a butcher of cattle, a jailer, or has some other cruel livelihood. | T: Here a certain person is a butcher of sheep…as MN51, §9…or one who follows any other such bloody occupation.
mn60:37.3 | S: This is called an individual who mortifies others, being committed to the practice of mortifying others. | T: This is called the kind of person who torments others and pursues the practice of torturing others.
mn60:38.1 | S: And what individual mortifies themselves and others, being committed to the practice of mortifying themselves and others? | T: “What kind of a person, householders, torments himself and pursues the practice of torturing himself and also torments others and pursues the practice of torturing others?
mn60:38.2 | S: It’s when an individual is an anointed aristocratic king or a well-to-do brahmin. He has a new ceremonial hall built to the east of the citadel. He shaves off his hair and beard, dresses in a rough antelope hide, and smears his body with ghee and oil. … | T: Here some person is a head-anointed noble king or a well-to-do brahmin… as MN51,
mn60:38.3 | S: His bondservants, servants, and workers do their jobs under threat of punishment and danger, weeping, with tearful faces. | T: §10…And then his slaves, messengers, and servants make preparations, weeping with tearful faces, being spurred on by threats of punishment and by fear.
mn60:38.4 | S: This is called an individual who mortifies themselves and others, being committed to the practice of mortifying themselves and others. | T: This is called the kind of person who torments himself and pursues the practice of torturing himself and who torments others and pursues the practice of torturing others.
mn60:39.1 | S: And what individual doesn’t mortify either themselves or others, committed to the practice of not mortifying themselves or others, | T: “What kind of person, householders, does not torment himself or pursue the practice of torturing himself and does not torment others or pursue the practice of torturing others—the one who, since he torments neither himself nor others,
