## dn2, continued
dn2:19.0 | S: 3.2. The Doctrine of the Bamboo-staffed Ascetic Gosāla | T: The Doctrine of Makkhali Gosāla
dn2:19.1 | S: This one time, sir, I approached the bamboo-staffed ascetic Gosāla and exchanged greetings with him. | T: “Another time, venerable sir, I approached Makkhali Gosāla, exchanged greetings and courtesies with him, and sat down to one side.
dn2:19.2 | S: When the greetings and polite conversation were over, I sat down to one side, and asked him the same question. | T: I then asked him (as in §14) if he could point out a fruit of recluseship visible here and now.
dn2:20.1 | S: He said: | T: “When I had finished speaking, Makkhali Gosāla said to me:
dn2:20.2 | S: ‘Great king, there is no cause or reason for the corruption of sentient beings. Sentient beings are corrupted without cause or reason. | T: ‘Great king, there is no cause or condition for the defilement of beings; beings are defiled without any cause or condition.
dn2:20.3 | S: There’s no cause or reason for the purification of sentient beings. | T: There is no cause or condition for the purification of beings;
dn2:20.4 | S: Sentient beings are purified without cause or reason. | T: beings are purified without cause or condition.
dn2:20.5 | S: One does not act of one’s own volition, one does not act of another’s volition, one does not act from a person’s volition. There is no power, no energy, no human strength or vigor. | T: There is no self-determination, no determination by others, no personal determination. There is no power, no energy, no personal strength,
dn2:20.6 | S: All sentient beings, all living creatures, all beings, all souls lack control, power, and energy. Molded by destiny, circumstance, and nature, they experience pleasure and pain in the six classes of rebirth. | T: no personal fortitude. All sentient beings, all living beings, all creatures, all souls, are helpless, powerless, devoid of energy. Undergoing transformation by destiny, circumstance, and nature, they experience pleasure and pain in the six classes of men.
dn2:20.7 | S: There are 1.4 million main wombs, and 6,000, and 600; 500 deeds, and five, and three; deeds and half-deeds; 62 paths of practice, 62 sub-eons, six classes of rebirth, and eight stages in a person’s life; 4,900 Ājīvaka ascetics, 4,900 wanderers, and 4,900 dragon abodes; 2,000 lordships, 3,000 hells, and 36 realms of dusky sky; seven percipient embryos, seven non-percipient embryos, seven knotless embryos, seven gods, seven mental heavens, seven goblins, seven streams, seven castoff incarnations and 700 castoff incarnations, seven downfalls and 700 downfalls, seven dreams and 700 dreams, and 8.4 million great eons—through all of which the foolish and the astute transmigrate before making an end of suffering. | T: ‘There are fourteen hundred thousand principal modes of origin (for living beings) and six thousand (others) and six hundred (others). There are five hundred kinds of kamma and five kinds of kamma and three kinds of kamma and full kamma and half-kamma. There are sixty-two pathways, sixty-two sub-aeons, six classes of men, eight stages in the life of man, forty-nine hundred modes of livelihood, forty-nine hundred kinds of wanderers, forty-nine hundred abodes of Nāgas, two thousand faculties, three thousand hells, thirty-six realms of dust, seven spheres of percipient beings, seven spheres of non-percipient beings, seven kinds of jointed plants, seven kinds of gods, seven kinds of human beings, seven kinds of demons, seven great lakes, seven major kinds of knots, seven hundred minor kinds of knots, seven major precipices, seven hundred minor precipices, seven major kinds of dreams, seven hundred minor kinds of dreams, eighty-four hundred thousand great aeons. The foolish and the wise, having roamed and wandered through these, will alike make an end to suffering.
dn2:20.8 | S: And here there is no such thing as this: “By this precept or observance or fervent austerity or spiritual practice I shall force unripened deeds to bear their fruit, or eliminate old deeds by experiencing their results little by little,” for that cannot be. | T: ‘Though one might think: “By this moral discipline or observance or austerity or holy life I will ripen unripened kamma and eliminate ripened kamma whenever it comes up”—that cannot be.
dn2:20.9 | S: Pleasure and pain are allotted. Transmigration lasts only for a limited period, so there’s no increase or decrease, no getting better or worse. | T: For pleasure and pain are measured out. Saṁsāra’s limits are fixed, and they can neither be shortened nor extended. There is no advancing forward and no falling back.
dn2:20.10 | S: It’s like how, when you toss a ball of string, it rolls away unraveling. | T: Just as, when a ball of string is thrown, it rolls along unwinding until it comes to its end,
dn2:20.11 | S: In the same way, after transmigrating the foolish and the astute will make an end of suffering.’ | T: in the same way, the foolish and the wise roam and wander (for the fixed length of time), after which they make an end to suffering.’
dn2:21.1 | S: And so, when I asked the bamboo-staffed ascetic Gosāla about the fruits of the ascetic life apparent in the present life, he answered with the doctrine of purification through transmigration. | T: “Thus, venerable sir, when I asked Makkhali Gosāla about a visible fruit of recluseship, he explained to me (his doctrine of) purification through wandering in saṁsāra.
dn2:21.2 | S: It was like someone who, when asked about a mango, answered with a breadfruit, or when asked about a breadfruit, answered with a mango. | T: Venerable sir, just as if one asked about a mango would speak about a breadfruit, or as if one asked about a breadfruit would speak about a mango,
dn2:21.3 | P: evameva kho me, bhante, makkhali gosālo sandiṭṭhikaṁ sāmaññaphalaṁ puṭṭho samāno saṁsārasuddhiṁ byākāsi. | T: in the same way, when I asked Makkhali Gosāla about a visible fruit of recluseship, he explained to me (his doctrine of) purification through wandering in saṁsāra.
dn2:21.4 | S: I thought: | T: Then, venerable sir, I thought to myself:
dn2:21.5 | S: ‘How on earth could one such as I presume to rebuke an ascetic or brahmin living in my realm?’ | T: ‘One like myself should not think of troubling a recluse or brahmin living in his realm.’
dn2:21.6 | S: So I neither approved nor rejected that statement of the bamboo-staffed ascetic Gosāla. | T: So I neither rejoiced in the statement of Makkhali Gosāla nor did I reject it.
dn2:21.7 | S: I was displeased, but did not express my displeasure. Neither accepting what he said nor contradicting it, I rose from my seat and left. | T: But, though I neither rejoiced in it nor rejected it, I still felt dissatisfied, yet did not utter a word of dissatisfaction. Without accepting his doctrine, without embracing it, I got up from my seat and left.
dn2:22.0 | S: 3.3. The Doctrine of Ajita of the Hair Blanket | T: The Doctrine of Ajita Kesakambala
dn2:22.1 | S: This one time, sir, I approached Ajita of the hair blanket and exchanged greetings with him. | T: “Another time, venerable sir, I approached Ajita Kesakambala, exchanged greetings and courtesies with him,
dn2:22.2 | S: When the greetings and polite conversation were over, I sat down to one side, and asked him the same question. | T: and sat down to one side. I then asked him (as in §14) if he could point out a fruit of recluseship visible here and now.
dn2:23.1 | S: He said: | T: “When I had finished speaking, Ajita Kesakambala said to me:
dn2:23.2 | S: ‘Great king, there is no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There’s no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There’s no afterlife. There’s no such thing as mother and father, or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there’s no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight. | T: ‘Great king, there is no giving, no offering, no liberality. There is no fruit or result of good and bad actions. There is no present world, no world beyond, no mother, no father, no beings who have taken rebirth. In the world there are no recluses and brahmins of right attainment and right practice who explain this world and the world beyond on the basis of their own direct knowledge and realization.
dn2:23.3 | S: This person is made up of the four principal states. When they die, the earth in their body merges and coalesces with the substance of earth. The water in their body merges and coalesces with the substance of water. The fire in their body merges and coalesces with the substance of fire. The air in their body merges and coalesces with the substance of air. The faculties are transferred to space. | T: A person is composed of the four primary elements. When he dies, the earth (in his body) returns to and merges with the (external) body of earth; the water (in his body) returns to and merges with the (external) body of water; the fire (in his body) returns to and merges with the (external) body of fire; the air (in his body) returns to and merges with the (external) body of air. His sense faculties pass over into space.
dn2:23.4 | S: Four men with a bier carry away the corpse. | T: Four men carry the corpse along on a bier.
dn2:23.5 | S: Their footprints show the way to the cremation ground. | T: His eulogies are sounded until they reach the charnel ground.
dn2:23.6 | S: The bones become bleached. Offerings dedicated to the gods end in ashes. | T: His bones turn pigeon-coloured. His meritorious offerings end in ashes.
dn2:23.7 | S: Giving is a doctrine of morons. | T: The practice of giving is a doctrine of fools.
dn2:23.8 | S: When anyone affirms a positive teaching it’s just hollow, false nonsense. | T: Those who declare that there is (an afterlife) speak only false, empty prattle.
dn2:23.9 | S: Both the foolish and the astute are annihilated and destroyed when their body breaks up, and don’t exist after death.’ | T: With the breaking up of the body, the foolish and the wise alike are annihilated and utterly perish. They do not exist after death.’
dn2:24.1 | S: And so, when I asked Ajita of the hair blanket about the fruits of the ascetic life apparent in the present life, he answered with the doctrine of annihilationism. | T: “Thus, venerable sir, when I asked Ajita Kesakambala about a visible fruit of recluseship, he explained to me (his doctrine of) annihilation.
dn2:24.2 | S: It was like someone who, when asked about a mango, answered with a breadfruit, or when asked about a breadfruit, answered with a mango. | T: Venerable sir, just as if one asked about a mango would speak about a breadfruit, or as if one asked about a breadfruit would speak about a mango,
dn2:24.3 | P: evameva kho me, bhante, ajito kesakambalo sandiṭṭhikaṁ sāmaññaphalaṁ puṭṭho samāno ucchedaṁ byākāsi. | T: in the same way, when I asked Ajita Kesakambala about a visible fruit of recluseship, he explained to me (his doctrine of) annihilation.
dn2:24.4 | S: I thought: | T: Then, venerable sir, I thought to myself:
dn2:24.5 | S: ‘How on earth could one such as I presume to rebuke an ascetic or brahmin living in my realm?’ | T: ‘One like myself should not think of troubling a recluse or brahmin living in his realm.’
dn2:24.6 | S: So I neither approved nor rejected that statement of Ajita of the hair blanket. | T: So I neither rejoiced in the statement of Ajita Kesakambala nor did I reject it.
dn2:24.7 | S: I was displeased, but did not express my displeasure. Neither accepting what he said nor contradicting it, I rose from my seat and left. | T: But though I neither rejoiced in it nor rejected it, I still felt dissatisfied, yet did not utter a word of dissatisfaction. Without accepting his doctrine, without embracing it, I got up from my seat and left.
dn2:25.0 | S: 3.4. The Doctrine of Pakudha Kaccāyana | T: The Doctrine of Pakudha Kaccāyana
dn2:25.1 | S: This one time, sir, I approached Pakudha Kaccāyana and exchanged greetings with him. | T: “Another time, venerable sir, I approached Pakudha Kaccāyana, exchanged greetings and courtesies with him,
dn2:25.2 | S: When the greetings and polite conversation were over, I sat down to one side, and asked him the same question. | T: and sat down to one side. I then asked him (as in §14) if he could point out a fruit of recluseship visible here and now.
dn2:26.1 | S: He said: | T: “When I had finished speaking, Pakudha Kaccāyana said to me:
dn2:26.2 | S: ‘Great king, these seven substances are not made, not derived, not created, without a creator, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. | T: ‘Great king, there are seven bodies that are unmade, unfashioned, uncreated, without a creator, barren, stable as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar.
dn2:26.3 | S: They don’t move or deteriorate or obstruct each other. They’re unable to cause pleasure, pain, or both pleasure and pain to each other. | T: They do not alter, do not change, do not obstruct one another; they are incapable of causing one another either pleasure or pain, or both pleasure and pain.
dn2:26.4 | S: What seven? | T: What are the seven?
dn2:26.5 | S: The substances of earth, water, fire, air; pleasure, pain, and the soul is the seventh. | T: The body of earth, the body of water, the body of fire, the body of air, pleasure, pain, and the soul as the seventh.
dn2:26.6 | S: These seven substances are not made, not derived, not created, without a creator, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. | T: (none)
dn2:26.7 | S: They don’t move or deteriorate or obstruct each other. They’re unable to cause pleasure, pain, or both pleasure and pain to each other. | T: (none)
dn2:26.8 | S: And here there is no one who kills or who makes others kill; no one who learns or who educates others; no one who understands or who helps others understand. | T: Among these there is no killer nor one who causes killing; no hearer nor one who causes hearing; no cognizer nor one who causes cognition.
dn2:26.9 | S: If you chop off someone’s head with a sharp sword, you don’t take anyone’s life. | T: If someone were to cut off (another person’s) head with a sharp sword, he would not be taking (the other’s) life.
dn2:26.10 | S: The sword simply passes through the gap between the seven substances.’ | T: The sword merely passes through the space between the seven bodies.’
dn2:27.1 | S: And so, when I asked Pakudha Kaccāyana about the fruits of the ascetic life apparent in the present life, he answered with something else entirely. | T: “Thus, venerable sir, when I asked Pakudha Kaccāyana about a visible fruit of recluseship, he answered me in a completely irrelevant way.
dn2:27.2 | S: It was like someone who, when asked about a mango, answered with a breadfruit, or when asked about a breadfruit, answered with a mango. | T: Venerable sir, just as if one asked about a mango would speak about a breadfruit, or as if one asked about a breadfruit would speak about a mango,
dn2:27.3 | P: evameva kho me, bhante, pakudho kaccāyano sandiṭṭhikaṁ sāmaññaphalaṁ puṭṭho samāno aññena aññaṁ byākāsi. | T: in the same way, when I asked Pakudha Kaccāyana about a visible fruit of recluseship, he answered me in a completely irrelevant way.
dn2:27.4 | S: I thought: | T: Then, venerable sir, I thought to myself:
dn2:27.5 | S: ‘How on earth could one such as I presume to rebuke an ascetic or brahmin living in my realm?’ | T: ‘One like myself should not think of troubling a recluse or brahmin living in his realm.’
dn2:27.6 | S: So I neither approved nor rejected that statement of Pakudha Kaccāyana. | T: So I neither rejoiced in the statement of Pakudha Kaccāyana nor did I reject it.
dn2:27.7 | S: I was displeased, but did not express my displeasure. Neither accepting what he said nor contradicting it, I rose from my seat and left. | T: But though I neither rejoiced in it nor rejected it, I still felt dissatisfied, yet did not utter a word of dissatisfaction. Without accepting his doctrine, without embracing it, I got up from my seat and left.
dn2:28.0 | S: 3.5. The Doctrine of the Jain Ascetic of the Ñātika Clan | T: The Doctrine of Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta
dn2:28.1 | S: This one time, sir, I approached the Jain Ñātika and exchanged greetings with him. | T: “Another time, venerable sir, I approached Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, exchanged greetings and courtesies with him,
dn2:28.2 | S: When the greetings and polite conversation were over, I sat down to one side, and asked him the same question. | T: and sat down to one side. I then asked him (as in §14) if he could point out a fruit of recluseship visible here and now.
dn2:29.1 | S: He said: | T: “When I had finished speaking, Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta said to me:
dn2:29.2 | S: ‘Great king, consider a Jain ascetic who is restrained in the fourfold constraint. | T: ‘Great king, a Nigaṇṭha, a knotless one, is restrained with a fourfold restraint.
dn2:29.3 | S: And how is a Jain ascetic restrained in the fourfold constraint? | T: How so? Herein, great king,
dn2:29.4 | S: It’s when a Jain ascetic is restrained in all that is to be restrained, is bridled in all that is to be restrained, has shaken off evil in all that is to be restrained, and is curbed in all that is to be restrained. | T: a Nigaṇṭha is restrained with regard to all water; he is endowed with the avoidance of all evil; he is cleansed by the avoidance of all evil; he is suffused with the avoidance of all evil.
dn2:29.5 | S: That’s how a Jain ascetic is restrained in the fourfold constraint. | T: Great king, when a Nigaṇṭha is restrained with this fourfold restraint,
dn2:29.6 | S: When a Jain ascetic is restrained in the fourfold constraint, | T: (none)
dn2:29.7 | S: they’re called a knotless one who is self-realized, self-controlled, and steadfast.’ | T: he is called a knotless one who is self-perfected, self-controlled, and self-established.’
dn2:30.1 | S: And so, when I asked the Jain Ñātika about the fruits of the ascetic life apparent in the present life, he answered with the fourfold constraint. | T: “Thus, venerable sir, when I asked Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta about a visible fruit of recluseship, he explained to me the fourfold restraint.
dn2:30.2 | S: It was like someone who, when asked about a mango, answered with a breadfruit, or when asked about a breadfruit, answered with a mango. | T: Venerable sir, just as if one asked about a mango would speak about a breadfruit, or as if one asked about a breadfruit would speak about a mango,
dn2:30.3 | P: evameva kho me, bhante, nigaṇṭho nāṭaputto sandiṭṭhikaṁ sāmaññaphalaṁ puṭṭho samāno cātuyāmasaṁvaraṁ byākāsi. | T: in the same way, when I asked Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta about a visible fruit of recluseship, he explained to me the fourfold restraint.
dn2:30.4 | S: I thought: | T: Then, venerable sir, I thought to myself:
dn2:30.5 | S: ‘How on earth could one such as I presume to rebuke an ascetic or brahmin living in my realm?’ | T: ‘One like myself should not think of troubling a recluse or brahmin living in his realm.’
dn2:30.6 | S: So I neither approved nor rejected that statement of the Jain Ñātika. | T: So I neither rejoiced in the statement of Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, nor did I reject it.
dn2:30.7 | S: I was displeased, but did not express my displeasure. Neither accepting what he said nor contradicting it, I rose from my seat and left. | T: But though I neither rejoiced in it nor rejected it, I still felt dissatisfied, yet did not utter a word of dissatisfaction. Without accepting his doctrine, without embracing it, I got up from my seat and left.”
dn2:31.0 | S: 3.6. The Doctrine of Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta | T: The Doctrine of Sañjaya Belaṭṭhaputta
dn2:31.1 | S: This one time, sir, I approached Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta and exchanged greetings with him. | T: “Another time, venerable sir, I approached Sañjaya Belaṭṭhaputta, exchanged greetings and courtesies with him,
dn2:31.2 | S: When the greetings and polite conversation were over, I sat down to one side, and asked him the same question. | T: and sat down to one side. I then asked him (as in §14) if he could point out any fruit of recluseship visible here and now.
dn2:31.3 | P: ‘yathā nu kho imāni, bho sañcaya, puthusippāyatanāni …pe… | T: “When I had finished speaking,
dn2:32.1 | S: He said: | T: Sañjaya Belaṭṭhaputta said to me:
dn2:32.2 | S: ‘Suppose you were to ask me whether there is another world. If I believed that to be the case, I would say so. | T: ‘If you ask me: “Is there a world beyond?” If I thought that there is a world beyond, I would declare to you “There is a world beyond.”
dn2:32.3 | S: But I don’t say it’s like this. I don’t say it’s like that. I don’t say it’s otherwise. I don’t say it’s not so. And I don’t deny it’s not so. | T: But I do not say “It is this way,” nor “It is that way,” nor “It is otherwise.” I do not say “It is not so,” nor do I say “It is not not so.”
dn2:32.4 | S: Suppose you were to ask me whether there is no other world … | T: ‘Similarly, you might ask me the following questions: “Is there no world beyond?”
dn2:32.5 | S: whether there both is and is not another world … | T: “Is it that there both is and is not a world beyond?”
dn2:32.6 | S: whether there neither is nor is not another world … | T: “Is it that there neither is nor is not a world beyond?”
dn2:32.7 | S: whether there are beings who are reborn spontaneously … | T: “Are there beings who have taken rebirth?”
dn2:32.8 | S: whether there are no beings who are reborn spontaneously … | T: “Are there no beings who have taken rebirth?”
dn2:32.9 | S: whether there both are and are not beings who are reborn spontaneously … | T: “Is it that there both are and are not beings who have taken rebirth?”
dn2:32.10 | S: whether there neither are nor are not beings who are reborn spontaneously … | T: “Is it that there neither are nor are not beings who have taken rebirth?”
dn2:32.11 | S: whether there is fruit and result of good and bad deeds … | T: “Is there fruit and result of good and bad actions?”
dn2:32.12 | S: whether there is no fruit and result of good and bad deeds … | T: “Is there no fruit and result of good and bad actions?”
dn2:32.13 | S: whether there both is and is not fruit and result of good and bad deeds … | T: “Is it that there both are and are not fruit and result of good and bad actions?”
dn2:32.14 | S: whether there neither is nor is not fruit and result of good and bad deeds … | T: “Is it that there neither are nor are not fruit and result of good and bad actions?”
dn2:32.15 | S: whether a realized one still exists after death … | T: “Does the Tathāgata exist after death?”
dn2:32.16 | S: whether a realized one no longer exists after death … | T: “Does the Tathāgata not exist after death?”
dn2:32.17 | S: whether a realized one both still exists and no longer exists after death … | T: “Does the Tathāgata both exist and not exist after death?”
dn2:32.18 | S: whether a realized one neither still exists nor no longer exists after death. If I believed that to be the case, I would say so. | T: “Does the Tathāgata neither exist nor not exist after death?” ‘If I thought that it was so, I would declare to you “It is so.”
dn2:32.19 | S: But I don’t say it’s like this. I don’t say it’s like that. I don’t say it’s otherwise. I don’t say it’s not so. And I don’t deny it’s not so.’ | T: But do I not say “It is this way,” nor “It is that way,” nor “It is otherwise.” I do not say “It is not so,” nor do I say “It is not not so.”’
dn2:33.1 | S: And so, when I asked Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta about the fruits of the ascetic life apparent in the present life, he answered with flip-flopping. | T: “Thus, venerable sir, when I asked Sañjaya Belaṭṭhaputta about a visible fruit of recluseship, he answered me evasively.
dn2:33.2 | S: It was like someone who, when asked about a mango, answered with a breadfruit, or when asked about a breadfruit, answered with a mango. | T: Venerable sir, just as if one asked about a mango would speak about a breadfruit, or as if one asked about a breadfruit would speak about a mango,
dn2:33.4 | S: I thought: | T: (none)
dn2:33.5 | S: ‘This is the most foolish and stupid of all these ascetics and brahmins! | T: in the same way,
dn2:33.6 | S: How on earth can he answer with flip-flopping when asked about the fruits of the ascetic life apparent in the present life?’ | T: when I asked Sañjaya Belaṭṭhaputta about a visible fruit of recluseship, he answered me evasively.
dn2:33.7 | S: I thought: | T: Then, venerable sir, I thought to myself:
dn2:33.8 | S: ‘How on earth could one such as I presume to rebuke an ascetic or brahmin living in my realm?’ | T: ‘One like myself should not think of troubling a recluse or brahmin living in his realm.’
dn2:33.9 | S: So I neither approved nor rejected that statement of Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta. | T: So I neither rejoiced in the statement of Sañjaya Belaṭṭhaputta nor did I reject it.
dn2:33.10 | S: I was displeased, but did not express my displeasure. Neither accepting what he said nor contradicting it, I rose from my seat and left. | T: But though I neither rejoiced in it nor rejected it, I still felt dissatisfied, yet did not utter a word of dissatisfaction. Without accepting his doctrine, without embracing it, I got up from my seat and left.
dn2:34.0.1 | S: 4. The Fruits of the Ascetic Life | T: (none)
dn2:34.0.2 | S: 4.1. The First Fruit of the Ascetic Life | T: The First Visible Fruit of Recluseship
dn2:34.1 | S: And so I ask the Buddha: | T: “So, venerable sir, I ask the Exalted One:
dn2:34.2 | S: Sir, there are many different professional fields. | T: There are, venerable sir, various crafts,
dn2:34.3 | S: These include elephant marshals, cavalry, charioteers, archers, bannermen, adjutants, food servers, warrior-chiefs, princes, chargers, great warriors, heroes, leather-clad soldiers, and sons of bondservants. | T: such as elephant trainers, horse trainers, charioteers, archers, standard bearers, camp marshals, commandos, high royal officers, front-line soldiers, bull-warriors, military heroes, mail-clad warriors, domestic slaves,
dn2:34.4 | S: They also include bakers, barbers, bathroom attendants, cooks, garland-makers, dyers, embroiderers, basket-makers, potters, accountants, finger-talliers, or those following any similar professions. All these live off the fruits of their profession which are apparent in this very life. | T: confectioners, barbers, bath attendants, cooks, garland-makers, laundrymen, weavers, basket-makers, potters, statisticians, accountants, and various other crafts of a similar nature. All those (who practise these crafts) enjoy here and now the visible fruits of their craft.
dn2:34.5 | S: With that they make themselves happy and pleased. They make their parents, their children and partners, and their friends and colleagues happy and pleased. And they establish an uplifting religious donation for ascetics and brahmins that’s conducive to heaven, ripens in happiness, and leads to heaven. | T: They obtain happiness and joy themselves, and they give happiness and joy to their parents, their wives and children, their friends and colleagues. They establish an excellent presentation of gifts to recluses and brahmins—leading to heaven, ripening in happiness, conducing to a heavenly rebirth.
dn2:34.6 | S: Sir, can you point out a fruit of the ascetic life that’s likewise apparent in this very life?” | T: Is it possible, venerable sir, to point out any fruit of recluseship that is similarly visible here and now?”
dn2:34.7 | S: “I can, Great King. | T: “It is, great king.
dn2:34.8 | S: Well then, I’ll ask you about this in return, and you can answer as you like. | T: But let me question you about this matter. Answer as you think fit.
dn2:35.1 | S: What do you think, Great King? | T: “What do you think, great king?
dn2:35.2 | S: Suppose you had a person who was a bondservant, a worker. They get up before you and go to bed after you, and are obliging, behaving nicely and speaking politely, and gazing up at your face. | T: Suppose you have a slave, a workman who rises up before you, retires after you, does whatever you want, acts always for your pleasure, speaks politely to you, and is ever on the lookout to see that you are satisfied.
dn2:35.3 | S: They’d think: | T: The thought might occur to him:
dn2:35.4 | S: ‘The outcome and result of good deeds is just so incredible, so amazing! | T: ‘It is wonderful and marvellous, the destiny and result of meritorious deeds.
dn2:35.5 | S: For this King Ajātasattu is a human being, and so am I. | T: For this King Ajātasattu is a human being, and I too am a human being,
dn2:35.6 | S: Yet he amuses himself, supplied and provided with the five kinds of sensual stimulation as if he were a god. | T: yet King Ajātasattu enjoys himself fully endowed and supplied with the five strands of sense pleasure as if he were a god,
dn2:35.7 | S: Whereas I’m his bondservant, his worker. I get up before him and go to bed after him, and am obliging, behaving nicely and speaking politely, and gazing up at his face. | T: while I am his slave, his workman—rising before him, retiring after him, doing whatever he wants, acting always for his pleasure, speaking politely to him, ever on the lookout to see that he is satisfied.
dn2:35.8 | S: I really should do good deeds. | T: I could be like him if I were to do meritorious deeds.
dn2:35.9 | S: Why don’t I shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness?’ | T: Let me then shave off my hair and beard, put on saffron robes, and go forth from home to homelessness.’
dn2:35.10 | S: After some time, that is what they do. | T: “After some time he shaves off his hair and beard, puts on saffron robes,
dn2:35.11 | S: Having gone forth they’d live restrained in body, speech, and mind, living content with nothing more than food and clothes, delighting in seclusion. | T: and goes forth from home to homelessness. Having gone forth he dwells restrained in body, speech, and mind, content with the simplest food and shelter, delighting in solitude.
dn2:35.12 | S: And suppose your men were to report all this to you. | T: Suppose your men were to report all this to you.
dn2:35.16 | S: Would you say to them: | T: Would you say:
dn2:35.17 | S: ‘Bring that person to me! Let them once more be my bondservant, my worker’?” | T: ‘Bring that man back to me, men. Let him again become my slave, my workman, rising before me, retiring after me, doing whatever I want, acting always for my pleasure, speaking politely to me, ever on the lookout to see that I am satisfied.’?”
dn2:36.1 | S: “No, sir. | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.
dn2:36.2 | S: Rather, I would bow to them, rise in their presence, and offer them a seat. I’d invite them to accept robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. And I’d organize their lawful guarding and protection.” | T: Rather, we would pay homage to him, rise up out of respect for him, invite him to a seat, and invite him to accept from us robes, almsfood, dwelling and medicinal requirements. And we would provide him righteous protection, defence, and security.”
dn2:36.3 | S: “What do you think, Great King? | T: “What do you think, great king?
dn2:36.4 | S: If this is so, is there a fruit of the ascetic life apparent in the present life or not?” | T: If such is the case, is there or is there not a visible fruit of recluseship?”
dn2:36.5 | S: “Clearly, sir, there is.” | T: “There certainly is, venerable sir.”
dn2:36.6 | S: “This is the first fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in this very life, which I point out to you.” | T: “This, great king, is the first fruit of recluseship, visible here and now, that I point out to you.”
dn2:37.0 | S: 4.2. The Second Fruit of the Ascetic Life | T: The Second Visible Fruit of Recluseship
dn2:37.1 | S: “But sir, can you point out another fruit of the ascetic life that’s likewise apparent in this very life?” | T: “Is it possible, venerable sir, to point out some other fruit of recluseship visible here and now?”
dn2:37.2 | S: “I can, Great King. | T: “It is, great king.
dn2:37.3 | S: Well then, I’ll ask you about this in return, and you can answer as you like. | T: But let me question you about this matter. Answer as you think fit.
dn2:37.4 | S: What do you think, Great King? | T: “What do you think, great king?
dn2:37.5 | S: Suppose you had a person who was a farmer, a householder, a hard worker, someone who builds up their capital. | T: Suppose there is a farmer, a householder, who pays taxes to maintain the royal revenue.
dn2:37.6 | S: They’d think: | T: The thought might occur to him:
dn2:37.7 | S: ‘The outcome and result of good deeds is just so incredible, so amazing! | T: ‘It is wonderful and marvellous, the destiny and result of meritorious deeds.
dn2:37.8 | S: For this King Ajātasattu is a human being, and so am I. | T: For this King Ajātasattu is a human being, and I too am a human being.
dn2:37.9 | S: Yet he amuses himself, supplied and provided with the five kinds of sensual stimulation as if he were a god. | T: Yet King Ajātasattu enjoys himself fully endowed and supplied with the five strands of sense pleasure as if he were a god,
dn2:37.10 | S: Whereas I’m a farmer, a householder, a hard worker, someone who builds up their capital. | T: while I am a farmer, a householder, who pays taxes to maintain the royal revenue.
dn2:37.11 | S: I really should do good deeds. | T: I could be like him if I were to do meritorious deeds.
dn2:37.12 | S: Why don’t I shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness?’ | T: Let me then shave off my hair and beard, put on saffron robes, and go forth from home to homelessness.’
dn2:37.13 | S: After some time they give up a large or small fortune, and a large or small family circle. They’d shave off hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness. | T: “After some time, he abandons his accumulation of wealth, be it large or small, abandons his circle of relatives, be it large or small; he shaves off his hair and beard, puts on saffron robes, and goes forth from home to homelessness.
dn2:37.14 | S: Having gone forth they’d live restrained in body, speech, and mind, living content with nothing more than food and clothes, delighting in seclusion. | T: Having gone forth, he dwells restrained in body, speech, and mind, content with the simplest food and shelter, delighting in solitude.
dn2:37.15 | S: And suppose your men were to report all this to you. | T: Suppose your men were to report all this to you.
dn2:37.19 | S: Would you say to them: | T: Would you say:
dn2:37.20 | S: ‘Bring that person to me! Let them once more be a farmer, a householder, a hard worker, someone who builds up their capital’?” | T: ‘Bring that man back to me, men. Let him again become a farmer, a householder, who pays taxes to maintain the royal revenue’?”
dn2:38.1 | S: “No, sir. | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.
dn2:38.2 | S: Rather, I would bow to them, rise in their presence, and offer them a seat. I’d invite them to accept robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. And I’d organize their lawful guarding and protection.” | T: Rather, we would pay homage to him, rise up out of respect for him, invite him to a seat, and invite him to accept from us robes, almsfood, dwelling, and medicinal requirements. And we would provide him with righteous protection, defence, and security.”
dn2:38.3 | S: “What do you think, Great King? | T: “What do you think, great king?
dn2:38.4 | S: If this is so, is there a fruit of the ascetic life apparent in the present life or not?” | T: If such is the case, is there or is there not a visible fruit of recluseship?”
dn2:38.5 | S: “Clearly, sir, there is.” | T: “There certainly is, venerable sir.”
dn2:38.6 | S: “This is the second fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in this very life, which I point out to you.” | T: “This, great king, is the second fruit of recluseship, visible here and now, that I point out to you.”
dn2:39.0 | S: 4.3. The Finer Fruits of the Ascetic Life | T: The More Excellent Fruits of Recluseship
dn2:39.1 | S: “But sir, can you point out a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in this very life which is better and finer than these?” | T: “Is it possible, venerable sir, to point out any other fruit of recluseship visible here and now, more excellent and sublime than these two fruits?”
dn2:39.2 | S: “I can, Great King. | T: “It is possible.
dn2:39.3 | S: Well then, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.” | T: Listen, great king, and attend carefully, I will speak.”
dn2:39.4 | S: “Yes, sir,” replied the king. | T: “Yes, venerable sir,” King Ajātasattu replied to the Exalted One.
dn2:39.5 | S: The Buddha said this: | T: The Exalted One spoke:
dn2:40.1 | S: “Consider when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed. | T: “Herein, great king, a Tathāgata arises in the world, a worthy one, perfectly enlightened, endowed with clear knowledge and conduct, accomplished, a knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of men to be tamed, teacher of gods and men, enlightened and exalted.
dn2:40.2 | S: He has realized with his own insight this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—and he makes it known to others. | T: Having realized by his own direct knowledge this world with its gods, its Māras, and its Brahmās, this generation with its recluses and brahmins, its rulers and people, he makes it known to others.
dn2:40.3 | S: He teaches Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. | T: He teaches the Dhamma that is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, possessing meaning and phrasing; he reveals the holy life that is fully complete and purified.
dn2:41.1 | S: A householder hears that teaching, or a householder’s child, or someone reborn in a good family. | T: “A householder, or a householder’s son, or one born into some other family, hears the Dhamma.
dn2:41.2 | S: They gain faith in the Realized One | T: Having heard the Dhamma, he gains faith in the Tathāgata.
dn2:41.3 | S: and reflect: | T: Endowed with such faith, he reflects:
dn2:41.4 | S: ‘Life at home is cramped and dirty, life gone forth is wide open. | T: ‘The household life is crowded, a path of dust. Going forth is like the open air.
dn2:41.5 | S: It’s not easy for someone living at home to lead the spiritual life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell. | T: It is not easy for one dwelling at home to lead the perfectly complete, perfectly purified holy life, bright as a polished conch.
dn2:41.6 | S: Why don’t I shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness?’ | T: Let me then shave off my hair and beard, put on saffron robes, and go forth from home to homelessness.’
dn2:41.7 | S: After some time they give up a large or small fortune, and a large or small family circle. They shave off hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness. | T: “After some time he abandons his accumulation of wealth, be it large or small; he abandons his circle of relatives, be it large or small; he shaves off his hair and beard, puts on saffron robes, and goes forth from home to homelessness.
dn2:42.1 | S: Once they’ve gone forth, they live restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. They act skillfully by body and speech. They’re purified in livelihood and accomplished in ethical conduct. They guard the sense doors, have mindfulness and situational awareness, and are content. | T: “When he has thus gone forth, he lives restrained by the restraint of the Pātimokkha, possessed of proper behaviour and resort. Having taken up the rules of training, he trains himself in them, seeing danger in the slightest faults. He comes to be endowed with wholesome bodily and verbal action, his livelihood is purified, and he is possessed of moral discipline. He guards the doors of his sense faculties, is endowed with mindfulness and clear comprehension, and is content.
dn2:43.0.1 | S: 4.3.1. Ethics | T: The Small Section on Moral Discipline
dn2:43.0.2 | S: 4.3.1.1. The Shorter Section on Ethics | T: (none)
dn2:43.1 | S: And how, Great King, is a mendicant accomplished in ethics? | T: “And how, great king, is the bhikkhu possessed of moral discipline? Herein, great king,
dn2:43.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant gives up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. They’re scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for all living beings. | T: having abandoned the destruction of life, the bhikkhu abstains from the destruction of life. He has laid down the rod and weapon and dwells conscientious, full of kindness, sympathetic for the welfare of all living beings.
dn2:43.3 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: This pertains to his moral discipline.
dn2:43.4 | S: They give up stealing. They take only what’s given, and expect only what’s given. They keep themselves clean by not thieving. | T: “Having abandoned taking what is not given, he abstains from taking what is not given. Accepting and expecting only what is given, he lives in honesty with a pure mind.
dn2:43.5 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: This too pertains to his moral discipline.
dn2:43.6 | S: They give up unchastity. They are chaste, set apart, refraining from the vulgar act of sex. | T: “Having abandoned incelibacy, he leads the holy life of celibacy. He dwells aloof and abstains from the vulgar practice of sexual intercourse.
dn2:43.7 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: This too pertains to his moral discipline.
dn2:44.1 | S: They give up lying. They speak the truth and stick to the truth. They’re honest and dependable, and don’t trick the world with their words. | T: “Having abandoned false speech, he abstains from falsehood. He speaks only the truth, he lives devoted to truth; trustworthy and reliable, he does not deceive anyone in the world.
dn2:44.2 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: This too pertains to his moral discipline.
dn2:44.3 | S: They give up backbiting. They don’t repeat in one place what they heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead, they reconcile those who are divided and support those who are united, delighting in harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony. | T: “Having abandoned slander, he abstains from slander. He does not repeat elsewhere what he has heard here in order to divide others from the people here, nor does he repeat here what he has heard elsewhere in order to divide these from the people there. Thus he is a reconciler of those who are divided and a promoter of friendships. Rejoicing, delighting, and exulting in concord, he speaks only words that are conducive to concord.
dn2:44.4 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: This too pertains to his moral discipline.
dn2:44.5 | S: They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way that’s mellow, pleasing to the ear, endearing, going to the heart, polite, and likable and agreeable to the people. | T: “Having abandoned harsh speech, he abstains from harsh speech. He speaks only such words as are gentle, pleasing to the ear, endearing, going to the heart, polite, amiable and agreeable to the manyfolk.
dn2:44.6 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: This too pertains to his moral discipline.
dn2:44.7 | S: They give up talking nonsense. Their words are timely, true, and meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. They say things at the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial. | T: “Having abandoned idle chatter, he abstains from idle chatter. He speaks at the right time, speaks what is factual and beneficial, speaks on the Dhamma and the Discipline. His words are worth treasuring; they are timely, backed by reasons, measured, and connected with the good.
dn2:44.8 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: This too pertains to his moral discipline.
dn2:45.1 | S: They refrain from injuring plants and seeds. | T: “He abstains from damaging seed and plant life.
dn2:45.2 | S: They eat in one part of the day, abstaining from eating at night and food at the wrong time. | T: “He eats only in one part of the day, refraining from food at night and from eating at improper times.
dn2:45.3 | S: They refrain from seeing shows of dancing, singing, and music. | T: “He abstains from dancing, singing, instrumental music, and from witnessing unsuitable shows.
dn2:45.4 | S: They refrain from attiring and adorning themselves with garlands, fragrance, and makeup. | T: “He abstains from wearing garlands, embellishing himself with scents, and beautifying himself with unguents.
dn2:45.5 | S: They refrain from high and luxurious beds. | T: “He abstains from high and luxurious beds and seats.
dn2:45.6 | S: They refrain from receiving gold and currency, | T: “He abstains from accepting gold and silver.
dn2:45.7 | S: raw grains, | T: “He abstains from accepting uncooked grain,
dn2:45.8 | S: raw meat, | T: raw meat,
dn2:45.9 | S: women and girls, | T: women and girls,
dn2:45.10 | S: male and female bondservants, | T: male and female slaves,
dn2:45.11 | S: goats and sheep, | T: goats and sheep,
dn2:45.12 | S: chickens and pigs, | T: fowl and swine,
dn2:45.13 | S: elephants, cows, horses, and mares, | T: elephants, cattle, horses and mares.
dn2:45.14 | S: and fields and land. | T: “He abstains from accepting fields and lands.
dn2:45.15 | S: They refrain from running errands and messages; | T: “He abstains from running messages and errands.
dn2:45.16 | S: buying and selling; | T: “He abstains from buying and selling.
dn2:45.17 | S: falsifying weights, metals, or measures; | T: “He abstains from dealing with false weights, false metals, and false measures.
dn2:45.18 | S: bribery, fraud, cheating, and duplicity; | T: “He abstains from the crooked ways of bribery, deception, and fraud.
dn2:45.19 | S: mutilation, murder, abduction, banditry, plunder, and violence. | T: “He abstains from mutilating, executing, imprisoning, robbery, plunder, and violence.
dn2:45.20 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: “This too pertains to his moral discipline.
dn2:45.21 | S: The shorter section on ethics is complete. | T: (none)
dn2:46.0 | S: 4.3.1.2. The Middle Section on Ethics | T: The Intermediate Section on Moral Discipline
dn2:46.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in injuring plants and seeds. | T: “Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on food offered by the faithful, continually cause damage to seed and plant life—
dn2:46.2 | S: These include plants propagated from roots, trunks, cuttings, or joints; and those from regular seeds as the fifth. They refrain from such injury to plants and seeds. | T: to plants propagated from roots, stems, joints, buds, and seeds—he abstains from damaging seed and plant life.
dn2:46.3 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: This too pertains to his moral discipline.
dn2:47.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in storing up goods for their own use. | T: “Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on food offered by the faithful, enjoy the use of stored-up goods, such as stored-up food,
dn2:47.2 | S: This includes such things as food, drink, clothes, vehicles, bedding, fragrance, and things of the flesh. | T: drinks, garments, vehicles, bedding, scents, and comestibles—
dn2:47.3 | S: They refrain from storing up such goods. | T: he abstains from the use of stored-up goods.
dn2:47.4 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: This too pertains to his moral discipline.
dn2:48.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in seeing shows. | T: “Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on food offered by the faithful, attend unsuitable shows, such as:
dn2:48.2 | S: This includes such things as dancing, singing, music, performances, and storytelling; clapping, gongs, and kettledrums; beauty pageants; pole-acrobatics and bone-washing displays of the corpse-workers; battles of elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, goats, rams, chickens, and quails; staff-fights, boxing, and wrestling; combat, roll calls of the armed forces, battle-formations, and regimental reviews. | T: shows featuring dancing, singing, or instrumental music; theatrical performances; narrations of legends music played by hand-clapping, cymbals, and drums; picture houses; acrobatic performances; combats of elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, goats, rams, cocks and quails; stick-fights, boxing, and wrestling; sham-fights, roll-calls, battle-arrays, and regimental reviews—
dn2:48.3 | S: They refrain from such shows. | T: he abstains from attending such unsuitable shows.
dn2:48.4 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: This too pertains to his moral discipline.
dn2:49.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in gambling that causes negligence. | T: “Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on food offered by the faithful,
dn2:49.2 | S: This includes such things as checkers with eight or ten rows, checkers in the air, hopscotch, spillikins, board-games, tip-cat, drawing straws, dice, leaf-flutes, toy plows, somersaults, pinwheels, toy measures, toy carts, toy bows, guessing words from syllables, guessing another’s thoughts, and imitating musical instruments. | T: indulge in the following games and recreations: aṭṭhapada (a game played on an eight-row chessboard); dasapada (a game played on a ten-row chessboard); ākāsa (played by imagining a board in the air); parihārapatha (“hopscotch,” a diagram is drawn on the ground and one has to jump in the allowable spaces avoiding the lines); santika (“spillikins,” assembling the pieces in a pile, removing and returning them without disturbing the pile); khalika (dice games); ghaṭika (hitting a short stick with a long stick); salākahattha (a game played by dipping the hand in paint or dye, striking the ground or a wall, and requiring the participants to show the figure of an elephant, a horse etc.); akkha (ball games); paṅgacīra (blowing through toy pipes made of leaves); vaṅkaka (ploughing with miniature ploughs); mokkhacika (turning somersaults); ciṅgulika (playing with paper windmills); pattāḷaka (playing with toy measures); rathaka (playing with toy chariots); dhanuka (playing with toy bows); akkharika (guessing at letters written in the air or on one’s back); manesika (guessing others’ thoughts); yathāvajja (games involving mimicry of deformities)—
dn2:49.3 | S: They refrain from such gambling. | T: he abstains from such games that are a basis for negligence.
dn2:49.4 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: This too pertains to his moral discipline.
dn2:50.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still make use of high and luxurious bedding. | T: “Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on food offered by the faithful, enjoy the use of high and luxurious beds and seats, such as:
dn2:50.2 | S: This includes such things as sofas, couches, woolen covers—shag-piled, colorful, white, embroidered with flowers, quilted, embroidered with animals, double or single fringed—and silk covers studded with gems, as well as silken sheets, wollen carpets, rugs for elephants, horses, or chariots, black antelope hides and woven rugs, and spreads of fine deer hide, with a canopy above and red cushions at both ends. | T: spacious couches; thrones with animal figures carved on the supports; long-haired coverlets; multi-colored patchwork coverlets; white woollen coverlets woollen coverlets embroidered with flowers; quilts stuffed with cotton; woollen coverlets embroidered with animal figures; woollen coverlets with hair on both sides or on one side; bedspreads embroidered with gems; silk coverlets; dance-hall carpets; elephant, horse, or chariot rugs; rugs of antelope-skins; choice spreads made of kadali-deer hides; spreads with red awnings overhead; couches with red cushions for head and feet—
dn2:50.3 | S: They refrain from such bedding. | T: he abstains from the use of such high and luxurious beds and seats.
dn2:50.4 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: This too pertains to his moral discipline.
dn2:51.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in attiring and adorning themselves with garlands, fragrance, and makeup. | T: “Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on food offered by the faithful, enjoy the use of such devices for embellishing and beautifying themselves as the following:
dn2:51.2 | S: This includes such things as applying beauty products by anointing, massaging, bathing, and rubbing; mirrors, ointments, garlands, fragrances, and makeup; face-powder, foundation, bracelets, headbands, fancy walking-sticks or containers, rapiers, parasols, fancy sandals, turbans, jewelry, chowries, and long-fringed white robes. | T: rubbing scented powders into the body massaging with oils bathing in perfumed water kneading the limbs mirrors ointments garlands scents unguents face-powders make-up bracelets head-bands decorated walking sticks ornamented medicine-tubes rapiers sunshades embroidered sandals turbans diadems yaktail whisks and long-fringed white robes—
dn2:51.3 | S: They refrain from such attirement and adornment. | T: he abstains from the use of such devices for embellishment and beautification.
dn2:51.4 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: This too pertains to his moral discipline.
dn2:52.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in low talk. | T: “Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, engage in frivolous chatter, such as:
dn2:52.2 | S: This includes such topics as talk about kings, bandits, and chief ministers; talk about armies, threats, and wars; talk about food, drink, clothes, and beds; talk about garlands and fragrances; talk about family, vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and countries; talk about women and heroes; talk at the street market and the place for water pots; talk about the departed; motley talk; tales of land and sea; and talk about being reborn in this or that place. | T: talk about kings, thieves, and ministers of state talk about armies, dangers, and wars talk about food, drink, garments, and lodgings; talk about garlands and scents; talk about relations, vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and countries; talk about women and talk about heroes; street talk and talk by the well; talk about those departed in days gone by; rambling chit-chat; speculations about the world and about the sea; talk about gain and loss—
dn2:52.3 | S: They refrain from such low talk. | T: he abstains from such frivolous chatter.
dn2:52.4 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: This too pertains to his moral discipline.
dn2:53.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in arguments. | T: “Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, engage in wrangling argumentation,
dn2:53.2 | S: They say such things as: ‘You don’t understand this teaching and training. I understand this teaching and training. What, you understand this teaching and training? You’re practicing wrong. I’m practicing right. I stay on topic, you don’t. You said last what you should have said first. You said first what you should have said last. What you’ve thought so much about has been disproved. Your doctrine is refuted. Go on, save your doctrine! You’re trapped; get yourself out of this—if you can!’ | T: (saying to one another): ‘You don’t understand this doctrine and discipline. It is I who understand this doctrine and discipline.’ ‘How can you understand this doctrine and discipline?’ ‘You’re practising the wrong way. I’m practicing the right way.’ ‘I’m being consistent. You’re inconsistent.’ ‘What should have been said first you said last, what should have been said last you said first.’ ‘What you took so long to think out has been confuted.’ ‘Your doctrine has been refuted. You’re defeated. Go, try to save your doctrine, or disentangle yourself now if you can’—
dn2:53.3 | S: They refrain from such argumentative talk. | T: he abstains from such wrangling argumentation.
dn2:53.4 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: This too pertains to his moral discipline.
dn2:54.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in running errands and messages. | T: “Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, engage in running messages and errands for kings,
dn2:54.2 | S: This includes running errands for rulers, ministers, aristocrats, brahmins, householders, or princes who say: ‘Go here, go there. Take this, bring that from there.’ | T: ministers of state, khattiyas, brahmins, householders, or youths, (who command them): ‘Go here, go there, take this, bring that from there’—
dn2:54.3 | S: They refrain from such errands. | T: he abstains from running such messages and errands.
dn2:54.4 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: This too pertains to his moral discipline.
dn2:55.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in fawning, flattery, hinting, and belittling, and using material things to chase after other material things. They refrain from such fraud and flattery. | T: “Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, engage in scheming, talking, hinting, belittling others, and pursuing gain with gain, he abstains from such kinds of scheming and talking.
dn2:55.2 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: This too pertains to his moral discipline.
dn2:55.3 | S: The middle section on ethics is complete. | T: (none)
dn2:56.0 | S: 4.3.1.3. The Long Section on Ethics | T: The Large Section on Moral Discipline
dn2:56.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: “Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, earn their living by a wrong means of livelihood, by such debased arts as:
dn2:56.2 | S: This includes such fields as augury, omenology, divining portents, interpreting dreams, divining features of men and women, divining holes in cloth gnawed by mice, fire offerings, ladle offerings, offerings of husks, rice powder, rice, ghee, or oil; offerings from the mouth, blood sacrifices, limb-reading; geomancy for building sites, fields, and cemeteries; exorcisms, earth magic, snake charming, poisons; the lore of the scorpion, the rat, the bird, and the crow; prophesying lifespan, chanting for protection, and divining omens from wild animals. | T: prophesying long life, prosperity etc., or the reverse, from the marks on a person’s limbs, hands, feet, etc.; divining by means of omens and signs; making auguries on the basis of thunderbolts and celestial portents; interpreting ominous dreams; telling fortunes from marks on the body; making auguries from the marks on cloth gnawed by mice; offering fire oblations; offering oblations from a ladle; offering oblations of husks, rice powder, rice grains, ghee and oil to the gods; offering oblations from the mouth; offering blood-sacrifices to the gods; making predictions based on the fingertips; determining whether the site for a proposed house or garden is propitious or not; making predictions for officers of state; laying demons in a cemetery; laying ghosts; knowledge of charms to be pronounced by one living in an earthen house; snake charming; the poison craft, scorpion craft, rat craft, bird craft, crow craft; foretelling the number of years that a man has to live; reciting charms to give protection from arrows; reciting charms to understand the language of animals—
