## sn35.31
sn35.31:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, I will teach you the practice that’s conducive to uprooting all conceiving. | T: “Bhikkhus, I will teach you the way that is suitable for uprooting all conceivings.
sn35.31:1.2 | S: Listen … | T: Listen to that….
sn35.31:1.3 | S: And what is the practice that’s conducive to uprooting all conceiving? | T: “And what, bhikkhus, is the way that is suitable for uprooting all conceivings?
sn35.31:1.4 | S: It’s when a mendicant does not conceive anything to be the eye, does not conceive it in the eye, does not conceive it as the eye, and does not conceive that ‘the eye is mine.’ | T: Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu does not conceive the eye, does not conceive in the eye, does not conceive from the eye, does not conceive, ‘The eye is mine.’
sn35.31:1.5 | S: They don’t conceive anything to be sights … | T: He does not conceive forms …
sn35.31:1.6 | S: eye consciousness … eye contact. And they don’t conceive anything to be the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on eye contact. They don’t conceive it in that, they don’t conceive it as that, and they don’t conceive that ‘that is mine.’ | T: eye-consciousness … eye-contact … and as to whatever feeling arises with eye-contact as condition—whether pleasant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant—he does not conceive that, does not conceive in that, does not conceive from that, does not conceive, ‘That is mine.’
sn35.31:1.7 | S: For whatever you conceive it to be, whatever you conceive it in, whatever you conceive it as, and whatever you conceive to be ‘mine’: that becomes something else. | T: For, bhikkhus, whatever one conceives, whatever one conceives in, whatever one conceives from, whatever one conceives as ‘mine’—that is otherwise.
sn35.31:1.8 | S: The world is attached to being, taking pleasure only in being, yet it becomes something else. | T: The world, becoming otherwise, attached to becoming, seeks delight only in becoming.
sn35.31:1.9 | S: They don’t conceive anything to be the ear … nose … tongue … | T: “He does not conceive the ear …
sn35.31:1.14 | S: body … | T: …
sn35.31:1.15 | S: mind … | T: (none)
sn35.31:1.18 | S: They don’t conceive anything to be the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on mind contact. They don’t conceive it in that, they don’t conceive it as that, and they don’t conceive that ‘that is mine.’ | T: He does not conceive the mind … and as to whatever feeling arises with mind-contact as condition … he does not conceive that, does not conceive in that, does not conceive from that, does not conceive, ‘That is mine.’
sn35.31:1.19 | S: For whatever you conceive it to be, whatever you conceive it in, whatever you conceive it as, and whatever you conceive to be ‘mine’: that becomes something else. | T: For, bhikkhus, whatever one conceives, whatever one conceives in, whatever one conceives from, whatever one conceives as ‘mine’—that is otherwise.
sn35.31:1.20 | S: The world is attached to being, taking pleasure only in being, yet it becomes something else. | T: The world, becoming otherwise, attached to becoming, seeks delight only in becoming.
sn35.31:1.21 | S: As far as the aggregates, elements, and sense fields extend, they don’t conceive anything to be that, they don’t conceive it in that, they don’t conceive it as that, and they don’t conceive that ‘that is mine.’ | T: “Whatever, bhikkhus, is the extent of the aggregates, the elements, and the sense bases, he does not conceive that, does not conceive in that, does not conceive from that, does not conceive, ‘That is mine.’
sn35.31:1.22 | S: Not conceiving, they don’t grasp at anything in the world. | T: “Since he does not conceive anything thus, he does not cling to anything in the world.
sn35.31:1.23 | S: Not grasping, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished. | T: Not clinging, he is not agitated. Being unagitated, he personally attains Nibbāna.
sn35.31:1.24 | S: They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’ | T: He understands: ‘Destroyed is birth, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more for this state of being.’
sn35.31:1.25 | S: This is the practice that’s conducive to uprooting all conceiving.” | T: “This, bhikkhus, is the way that is suitable for uprooting all conceivings.”

## dn1
dn1:1.0 | S: 1. Talk on Wanderers | T: I. Talk on Wanderers (Paribbājakakathā)
dn1:1.1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
dn1:1.1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was traveling along the road between Rājagaha and Nāḷandā together with a large Saṅgha of five hundred mendicants. | T: On one occasion the Exalted One was travelling along the highway between Rājagaha and Nālandā together with a great company of bhikkhus, with about five hundred bhikkhus.
dn1:1.1.3 | S: The wanderer Suppiya was also traveling along the same road, together with his resident pupil, the student Brahmadatta. | T: At the same time the wanderer Suppiya was also travelling along the highway between Rājagaha and Nālandā together with his pupil, the youth Brahmadatta.
dn1:1.1.4 | S: Meanwhile, Suppiya criticized the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha in many ways, | T: Along the way, the wanderer Suppiya spoke in many ways in dispraise of the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha.
dn1:1.1.5 | S: but his pupil Brahmadatta praised them in many ways. | T: But his pupil, the youth Brahmadatta, spoke in many ways in praise of the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha.
dn1:1.1.6 | S: And so both tutor and pupil followed behind the Buddha and the Saṅgha of mendicants directly contradicting each other. | T: Thus these two, teacher and pupil, followed closely behind the Exalted One and the company of bhikkhus, making assertions in direct contradiction to each other.
dn1:1.2.1 | S: Then the Buddha took up residence for the night in the royal rest-house in Ambalaṭṭhikā together with the Saṅgha of mendicants. | T: Then the Exalted One together with the company of bhikkhus entered the royal rest-house in the Ambalaṭṭhika garden in order to pass the night.
dn1:1.2.2 | S: And Suppiya and Brahmadatta did likewise. | T: The wanderer Suppiya together with his pupil, the youth Brahmadatta, also entered the royal rest-house in the Ambalaṭṭhika garden in order to pass the night.
dn1:1.2.3 | S: There too, Suppiya criticized the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha in many ways, | T: There, too, the wanderer Suppiya spoke in many ways in dispraise of the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha,
dn1:1.2.4 | S: but his pupil Brahmadatta praised them in many ways. | T: while his pupil Brahmadatta spoke in many ways in their praise.
dn1:1.2.5 | S: And so both tutor and pupil kept on directly contradicting each other. | T: Thus these two, teacher and pupil, dwelt together making assertions in direct contradiction to each other.
dn1:1.3.1 | S: Then several mendicants rose at the crack of dawn and sat together in the pavilion, where the topic of judgmentalism came up: | T: When dawn broke a number of bhikkhus, after rising, assembled in the pavilion. As they sat together, the following conversation sprang up among them:
dn1:1.3.2 | S: “It’s incredible, reverends, it’s amazing how the diverse convictions of sentient beings have been well deciphered by the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. | T: “It is wonderful and marvellous, friends, how the Exalted One, he who knows and sees, the Worthy One, the perfectly enlightened Buddha, has so thoroughly penetrated the diversity in the dispositions of beings.
dn1:1.3.3 | S: For this Suppiya criticizes the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha in many ways, | T: For this wanderer Suppiya spoke in many ways in dispraise of the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha,
dn1:1.3.4 | S: while his pupil Brahmadatta praises them in many ways. | T: while his own pupil, the youth Brahmadatta, spoke in many ways in their praise.
dn1:1.3.5 | S: And so both tutor and pupil followed behind the Buddha and the Saṅgha of mendicants directly contradicting each other.” | T: These two, teacher and pupil, followed closely behind the Exalted One and the company of bhikkhus, making assertions in direct contradiction to each other.”
dn1:1.4.1 | S: When the Buddha found out about this discussion on judgmentalism among the mendicants, he went to the pavilion, where he sat on the seat spread out and addressed the mendicants: | T: Then the Exalted One, realizing the turn their discussion had taken, entered the pavilion, sat down on the prepared seat, and addressed the bhikkhus:
dn1:1.4.2 | S: “Mendicants, what were you sitting talking about just now? What conversation was left unfinished?” | T: “What kind of discussion were you holding just now, bhikkhus? What was the subject of your conversation?”
dn1:1.4.3 | S: The mendicants told him what had happened, adding, | T: The bhikkhus replied: “When dawn had broken, Lord, after rising we assembled in the pavilion. As we sat here, the following conversation sprang up among us:
dn1:1.4.5 | P: ‘acchariyaṁ, āvuso, abbhutaṁ, āvuso, yāvañcidaṁ tena bhagavatā jānatā passatā arahatā sammāsambuddhena sattānaṁ nānādhimuttikatā suppaṭividitā. | T: ‘It is wonderful and marvellous friends, how the Exalted One, he who knows and sees, the Worthy One, the perfectly enlightened Buddha, has so thoroughly penetrated the diversity in the dispositions of beings.
dn1:1.4.6 | P: Ayañhi suppiyo paribbājako anekapariyāyena buddhassa avaṇṇaṁ bhāsati, dhammassa avaṇṇaṁ bhāsati, saṅghassa avaṇṇaṁ bhāsati; | T: For this wanderer Suppiya spoke in many ways in dispraise of the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha,
dn1:1.4.7 | P: suppiyassa pana paribbājakassa antevāsī brahmadatto māṇavo anekapariyāyena buddhassa vaṇṇaṁ bhāsati, dhammassa vaṇṇaṁ bhāsati, saṅghassa vaṇṇaṁ bhāsati. | T: while his own pupil, the youth Brahmadatta, spoke in many ways in their praise.
dn1:1.4.8 | P: Itihame ubho ācariyantevāsī aññamaññassa ujuvipaccanīkavādā bhagavantaṁ piṭṭhito piṭṭhito anubandhā honti bhikkhusaṅghañcā’ti. | T: These two, teacher and pupil, followed closely behind the Exalted One and the company of bhikkhus, making assertions in direct contradiction to each other.’
dn1:1.4.9 | S: “This was our conversation that was unfinished when the Buddha arrived.” | T: This, Lord, was the conversation we were having when the Exalted One arrived.”
dn1:1.5.1 | S: “Mendicants, if others criticize me, the teaching, or the Saṅgha, don’t make yourselves resentful, bitter, and exasperated. | T: “If, bhikkhus, others speak in dispraise of me, or in dispraise of the Dhamma, or in dispraise of the Sangha, you should not give way to resentment, displeasure, or animosity against them in your heart.
dn1:1.5.2 | S: You’ll get angry and upset, which would be an obstacle for you alone. | T: For if you were to become angry or upset in such a situation, you would only be creating an obstacle for yourselves.
dn1:1.5.3 | S: If others were to criticize me, the teaching, or the Saṅgha, and you got angry and upset, would you be able to understand whether they spoke well or poorly?” | T: If you were to become angry or upset when others speak in dispraise of us, would you be able to recognize whether their statements are rightly or wrongly spoken?”
dn1:1.5.4 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “Certainly not, Lord.”
dn1:1.6.1 | S: “If others criticize me, the teaching, or the Saṅgha, you should explain that what is untrue is in fact untrue: | T: “If, bhikkhus, others speak in dispraise of me, or in dispraise of the Dhamma, or in dispraise of the Sangha,
dn1:1.6.2 | S: ‘This is why that’s untrue, this is why that’s false. There’s no such thing in us, it’s not found among us.’ | T: you should unravel what is false and point it out as false, saying: ‘For such and such a reason this is false, this is untrue, there is no such thing in us, this is not found among us.’
dn1:1.6.3 | S: If others praise me, the teaching, or the Saṅgha, don’t make yourselves thrilled, elated, and excited. | T: “And if, bhikkhus, others speak in praise of me, or in praise of the Dhamma, or in praise of the Sangha, you should not give way to jubilation, joy, and exultation in your heart.
dn1:1.6.4 | S: You’ll get thrilled, elated, and excited, which would be an obstacle for you alone. | T: For if you were to become jubilant, joyful, and exultant in such a situation, you would only be creating an obstacle for yourselves.
dn1:1.6.5 | S: If others praise me, the teaching, or the Saṅgha, you should admit that what is true is in fact true: | T: If others speak in praise of me, or in praise of the Dhamma, or in praise of the Sangha, you should acknowledge what is fact as fact, saying:
dn1:1.6.6 | S: ‘This is why that’s true, this is why that’s correct. There is such a thing in us, it is found among us.’ | T: ‘For such and such a reason this is a fact, this is true, there is such a thing in us, this is found among us.’
dn1:1.7.0.1 | S: 2. Ethics | T: II. The Analysis of Virtue
dn1:1.7.0.2 | S: 2.1. The Shorter Section on Ethics | T: 1. The Short Section on Virtue (Cūḷasīla)
dn1:1.7.1 | S: When an ordinary person speaks praise of the Realized One, they speak only of trivial, trifling details of mere ethics. | T: “It is, bhikkhus, only to trifling and insignificant matters, to the minor details of mere moral virtue, that a worldling would refer when speaking in praise of the Tathāgata.
dn1:1.7.2 | S: And what are the trivial, trifling details of mere ethics that an ordinary person speaks of? | T: And what are those trifling and insignificant matters, those minor details of mere moral virtue, to which he would refer?
dn1:1.8.1 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has given up killing living creatures. He has renounced the rod and the sword. He’s scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for all living beings.’ | T: “‘Having abandoned the destruction of life, the recluse Gotama abstains from the destruction of life. He has laid aside the rod and the sword, and dwells conscientious, full of kindness, compassionate for the welfare of all living beings.’
dn1:1.8.2 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It is in this way, bhikkhus, that the worldling would speak when speaking in praise of the Tathāgata.
dn1:1.8.3 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has given up stealing. He takes only what’s given, and expects only what’s given. He keeps himself clean by not thieving.’ | T: “Or he might say: ‘Having abandoned taking what is not given, the recluse Gotama abstains from taking what is not given. Accepting and expecting only what is given, he dwells in honesty and rectitude of heart.’
dn1:1.8.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.8.5 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has given up unchastity. He is chaste, set apart, refraining from the vulgar act of sex.’ | T: ‘Having abandoned unchaste living, the recluse Gotama lives the life of chastity. He dwells remote (from women), and abstains from the vulgar practice of sexual intercourse.’
dn1:1.8.6 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.9.1 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has given up lying. He speaks the truth and sticks to the truth. He’s honest and dependable, and doesn’t trick the world with his words.’ | T: ‘Having abandoned false speech, the recluse Gotama abstains from falsehood. He speaks only the truth, he lives devoted to truth; trustworthy and reliable, he does not deceive anyone in the world.’
dn1:1.9.2 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.9.3 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has given up backbiting. He doesn’t repeat in one place what he heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead, he reconciles those who are divided and support those who are united, delighting in harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony.’ | T: ‘Having abandoned slander, the recluse Gotama abstains from slander. He does not repeat elsewhere what he has heard here in order to divide others from the people here, nor does he repeat here what he has heard elsewhere in order to divide these from the people there. Thus he is a reconciler of those who are divided and a promoter of friendships. Rejoicing, delighting, and exulting in concord, he speaks only words that are conducive to concord.’
dn1:1.9.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.9.5 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has given up harsh speech. He speaks in a way that’s mellow, pleasing to the ear, endearing, going to the heart, polite, and likable and agreeable to the people.’ | T: ‘Having abandoned harsh speech, the recluse Gotama abstains from harsh speech. He speaks only such words as are gentle, pleasing to the ear, endearing, going to the heart, urbane, amiable, and agreeable to many people.’
dn1:1.9.6 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.9.7 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has given up talking nonsense. His words are timely, true, and meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. He says things at the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial.’ | T: ‘Having abandoned idle chatter, the recluse Gotama abstains from idle chatter. He speaks at the right time, speaks what is factual, speaks on the good, on the Dhamma and the Discipline. His words are worth treasuring: they are timely, backed by reason, definite and connected with the good.’
dn1:1.9.8 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.10.1 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama refrains from injuring plants and seeds.’ | T: ‘The recluse Gotama abstains from damaging seed and plant life.
dn1:1.10.3 | S: ‘He eats in one part of the day, abstaining from eating at night and food at the wrong time.’ | T: He eats only in one part of the day, refraining from food at night and from eating at improper times.
dn1:1.10.4 | S: ‘He refrains from seeing shows of dancing, singing, and music.’ | T: He abstains from dancing, singing, instrumental music, and witnessing unsuitable shows.
dn1:1.10.5 | S: ‘He refrains from attiring and adorning himself with garlands, fragrance, and makeup.’ | T: He abstains from wearing garlands, embellishing himself with scents, and beautifying himself with unguents.
dn1:1.10.6 | S: ‘He refrains from high and luxurious beds.’ | T: (none)
dn1:1.10.7 | S: ‘He refrains from receiving gold and currency, | T: He abstains from accepting gold and silver.
dn1:1.10.8 | S: raw grains, | T: He abstains from accepting uncooked grain,
dn1:1.10.9 | S: raw meat, | T: raw meat,
dn1:1.10.10 | S: women and girls, | T: women and girls,
dn1:1.10.11 | S: male and female bondservants, | T: male and female slaves,
dn1:1.10.12 | S: goats and sheep, | T: goats and sheep,
dn1:1.10.13 | S: chickens and pigs, | T: fowl and swine,
dn1:1.10.14 | S: elephants, cows, horses, and mares, | T: elephants, cattle, horses and mares.
dn1:1.10.15 | S: and fields and land.’ | T: He abstains from accepting fields and lands.
dn1:1.10.16 | S: ‘He refrains from running errands and messages; | T: He abstains from running messages and errands.
dn1:1.10.17 | S: buying and selling; | T: He abstains from buying and selling,
dn1:1.10.18 | S: falsifying weights, metals, or measures; | T: and from dealing with false weights, false metals, and false measures.
dn1:1.10.19 | S: bribery, fraud, cheating, and duplicity; | T: He abstains from the crooked ways of bribery, deception, and fraud.
dn1:1.10.20 | S: mutilation, murder, abduction, banditry, plunder, and violence.’ | T: He abstains from mutilating, executing, imprisoning, robbery, plunder, and violence.’
dn1:1.10.21 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “It is in this way, bhikkhus, that the worldling would speak when speaking in praise of the Tathāgata.
dn1:1.10.22 | S: The shorter section on ethics is complete. | T: (none)
dn1:1.11.0 | S: 2.2. The Middle Section on Ethics | T: 2. The Intermediate Section on Virtue (Majjhimasīla)
dn1:1.11.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in injuring plants and seeds. | T: “Or he might say: ‘Whereas some honourable recluses and brahmins, while living on food offered by the faithful, continuously cause damage to seed and plant life—
dn1:1.11.2 | S: These include plants propagated from roots, trunks, cuttings, or joints; and those from regular seeds as the fifth. | T: to plants propagated from roots, stems, joints, buds, and seeds—
dn1:1.11.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such injury to plants and seeds.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from damaging seed and plant life.’
dn1:1.11.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.12.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in storing up goods for their own use. | T: ‘Whereas some honourable recluses and brahmins, while living on food offered by the faithful, enjoy the use of stored up goods such as stored up food,
dn1:1.12.2 | S: This includes such things as food, drink, clothes, vehicles, bedding, fragrance, and things of the flesh. | T: drinks, garments, vehicles, bedding, scents, and comestibles—
dn1:1.12.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from storing up such goods.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from the use of stored up goods’
dn1:1.12.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.13.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in seeing shows. | T: ‘Whereas some honourable recluses and brahmins, while living on food offered by the faithful, attend unsuitable shows, such as:
dn1:1.13.2 | S: This includes such things as dancing, singing, music, performances, and storytelling; clapping, gongs, and kettledrums; beauty pageants; pole-acrobatics and bone-washing displays of the corpse-workers; battles of elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, goats, rams, chickens, and quails; staff-fights, boxing, and wrestling; combat, roll calls of the armed forces, battle-formations, and regimental reviews. | T: shows featuring dancing, singing, or instrumental music; theatrical performances; narrations of legends; music played by hand-clapping, cymbals, and drums; picture houses; acrobatic performances; combats of elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, goats, rams, cocks and quails; stick-fights, boxing and wrestling, sham-fights, roll-calls, battle-arrays, and regimental reviews—
dn1:1.13.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such shows.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from attending such unsuitable shows.’
dn1:1.13.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.14.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in gambling that causes negligence. | T: “Whereas some honourable recluses and brahmins, while living on food offered by the faithful, indulge in the following games that are a basis for negligence:
dn1:1.14.2 | S: This includes such things as checkers with eight or ten rows, checkers in the air, hopscotch, spillikins, board-games, tip-cat, drawing straws, dice, leaf-flutes, toy plows, somersaults, pinwheels, toy measures, toy carts, toy bows, guessing words from syllables, guessing another’s thoughts, and imitating musical instruments. | T: aṭṭhapada (a game played on an eight-row chess-board); dasapada (a game played on a ten-row chess-board); ākāsa (a game of the same type played by imagining a board in the air); parihārapatha (“hopscotch,” a diagram is drawn on the ground and one has to jump in the allowable spaces avoiding the lines); santika (“spellicans,” assembling the pieces in a pile, removing and returning them without disturbing the pile); khalika (dice games); ghaṭika (hitting a short stick with a long stick); salākahattha (a game played by dipping the hand in paint or dye, striking the ground or a wall, and requiring the participants to show the figure of an elephant, a horse etc.); akkha (ball games); paṅgacīra (blowing through toy pipes made of leaves); vaṅkaka (ploughing with miniature ploughs); mokkhacika (turning somersaults); ciṅgulika (playing with paper windmills); pattāḷaka (playing with toy measures); rathaka (playing with toy chariots); dhanuka (playing with toy bows); akkharika (guessing at letters written in the air or on one’s back); manesika (guessing others’ thoughts); yathāvajja (games involving mimicry of deformities)—
dn1:1.14.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such gambling.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from such games and recreations.’
dn1:1.14.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.15.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still make use of high and luxurious bedding. | T: ‘Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on food offered by the faithful, enjoy the use of high and luxurious beds and seats, such as:
dn1:1.15.2 | S: This includes such things as sofas, couches, woolen covers—shag-piled, colorful, white, embroidered with flowers, quilted, embroidered with animals, double or single fringed—and silk covers studded with gems, as well as silken sheets, woollen carpets, rugs for elephants, horses, or chariots, black antelope hides and woven rugs, and spreads of fine deer hide, with a canopy above and red cushions at both ends. | T: spacious couches; thrones with animal figures carved on the supports; long-haired coverlets; multi-coloured patchwork coverlets; white woollen coverlets; woollen coverlets embroidered with flowers; quilts stuffed with cotton; woollen coverlets embroidered with animal figures; woollen coverlets with hair on both sides or on one side; bedspreads embroidered with gems; silk coverlets; dance-hall carpets; elephant, horse or chariot rugs; rugs of antelope-skins; choice spreads made of kadali-deer hides; spreads with red awnings overhead; couches with red cushions for the head and feet—
dn1:1.15.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such bedding.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from the use of such high and luxurious beds and seats.’
dn1:1.15.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.16.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in attiring and adorning themselves with garlands, fragrance, and makeup. | T: ‘Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, enjoy the use of such devices for embellishing and beautifying themselves as the following:
dn1:1.16.2 | S: This includes such things as applying beauty products by anointing, massaging, bathing, and rubbing; mirrors, ointments, garlands, fragrances, and makeup; face-powder, foundation, bracelets, headbands, fancy walking-sticks or containers, rapiers, parasols, fancy sandals, turbans, jewelry, chowries, and long-fringed white robes. | T: rubbing scented powders into the body, massaging with oils, bathing in perfumed water, kneading the limbs, mirrors, ointments, garlands, scents, unguents, face-powders, make-up, bracelets, head-bands, decorated walking sticks, ornamented medicine-tubes, rapiers, sunshades, embroidered sandals, turbans, diadems, yaktail whisks, and long-fringed white robes—
dn1:1.16.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such beautification and adornment.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from the use of such devices for embellishment and beautification.’
dn1:1.16.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.17.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in low talk. This includes such topics as | T: ‘Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, engage in frivolous chatter, such as:
dn1:1.17.2 | S: talk about kings, bandits, and chief ministers; talk about armies, threats, and wars; talk about food, drink, clothes, and beds; talk about garlands and fragrances; talk about family, vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and countries; talk about women and heroes; talk at the street market and the place for water pots; talk about the departed; motley talk; tales of land and sea; and talk about being reborn in this or that place. | T: talk about kings, thieves, and ministers of state; talk about armies, dangers and wars; talk about food, drink, garments, and lodgings; talk about garlands and scents; talk about relatives, vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and countries; talk about women and talk about heroes; street talk and talk by the well; talk about those departed in days gone by; rambling chit-chat; speculations about the world and about the sea; talk about gain and loss—
dn1:1.17.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low talk.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from such frivolous chatter.’
dn1:1.17.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.18.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in arguments. | T: ‘Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, engage in wrangling argumentation,
dn1:1.18.2 | S: They say such things as: “You don’t understand this teaching and training. I understand this teaching and training. What, you understand this teaching and training? You’re practicing wrong. I’m practicing right. I stay on topic, you don’t. You said last what you should have said first. You said first what you should have said last. What you’ve thought so much about has been disproved. Your doctrine is refuted. Go on, save your doctrine! You’re trapped; get yourself out of this—if you can!” | T: (saying to one another): “You don’t understand this doctrine and discipline. I am the one who understands this doctrine and discipline.” “How can you understand this doctrine and discipline?” “You’re practising the wrong way. I’m practising the right way.” “I’m being consistent. You’re inconsistent.” “What should have been said first you said last, what should have been said last you said first.” “What you took so long to think out has been confuted.” “Your doctrine has been refuted. You’re defeated. Go, try to save your doctrine, or disentangle yourself now if you can”—
dn1:1.18.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such argumentative talk.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from such wrangling argumentation.’
dn1:1.18.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.19.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in running errands and messages. | T: ‘Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, engage in running messages and errands for kings,
dn1:1.19.2 | S: This includes running errands for rulers, ministers, aristocrats, brahmins, householders, or princes who say: “Go here, go there. Take this, bring that from there.” | T: ministers of state, khattiyas, brahmins, householders, or youths, (who command them): “Go here, go there, take this, bring that from there”—
dn1:1.19.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such errands.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from running such messages and errands.’
dn1:1.19.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: (none)
dn1:1.20.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in deceit, flattery, hinting, and belittling, and using material things to chase after other material things. | T: “Or he might say: ‘Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, engage in scheming, talking, hinting, belittling others, and pursuing gain with gain—
dn1:1.20.2 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such fawning and flattery.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from such kinds of scheming and talking.’
dn1:1.20.3 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “It is in this way, bhikkhus, that a worldling would speak when speaking in praise of the Tathāgata.
dn1:1.20.4 | S: The middle section on ethics is complete. | T: (none)
dn1:1.21.0 | S: 2.3. The Large Section on Ethics | T: 3. The Long Section on Virtue (Mahāsīla)
dn1:1.21.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: “Or he might say: ‘Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, earn their living by a wrong means of livelihood, by such debased arts as:
dn1:1.21.2 | S: This includes such fields as augury, omenology, divining portents, interpreting dreams, divining features of men and women, divining holes in cloth gnawed by mice, fire offerings, ladle offerings, offerings of husks, rice powder, rice, ghee, or oil; offerings from the mouth, blood sacrifices, limb-reading; geomancy for building sites, fields, and cemeteries; exorcisms, earth magic, snake charming, poisons; the lore of the scorpion, the rat, the bird, and the crow; prophesying lifespan, chanting for protection, and divining omens from wild animals. | T: prophesying long life, prosperity etc., or the reverse, from the marks on a person’s limbs, hands, feet etc.; divining by means of omens and signs; making auguries on the basis of thunderbolts and celestial portents; interpreting ominous dreams; telling fortunes from marks on the body; making auguries from the marks on cloth gnawed by mice; offering fire oblations; offering oblations from a ladle; offering oblations of husks, rice powder, rice grains, ghee, and oil to the gods; offering oblations from the mouth; offering blood-sacrifices to the gods; making predictions based on the fingertips; determining whether the site for a proposed house or garden is propitious or not; making predictions for officers of state; the knowledge of charms to lay demons in a cemetery; the knowledge of charms to cure one possessed by ghosts; the knowledge of charms to be pronounced by one living in an earthen house; the snake craft (for curing snake bites and charming snakes); the poison craft (for neutralizing or making poison) the scorpion craft and rat craft (for curing scorpion stings and rat bites, respectively); the bird craft and crow craft (for understanding the cries of birds and crows); foretelling the number of years that a man has to live; the knowledge of charms to give protection from arrows; reciting charms to understand the language of animals—
dn1:1.21.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from such wrong means of livelihood, from such debased arts.’
dn1:1.21.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.22.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: ‘Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, earn their living by a wrong means of livelihood,
dn1:1.22.2 | S: This includes reading the marks of gems, cloth, clubs, swords, spears, arrows, bows, weapons, women, men, boys, girls, male and female bondservants, elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, cows, goats, rams, chickens, quails, monitor lizards, rabbits, tortoises, or deer. | T: by such debased arts as interpreting the significance of the colour, shape, and other features of the following items to determine whether they portend fortune or misfortune for their owners: gems, garments, staffs, swords, spears, arrows, bows, other weapons, women, men, boys, girls, slaves, slave-women, elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, cows, goats, rams, fowl, quails, lizards, rabbits, tortoises, and other animals—
dn1:1.22.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from such wrong means of livelihood, from such debased arts.’
dn1:1.22.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.23.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: ‘Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, earn their living by a wrong means of livelihood,
dn1:1.23.2 | S: This includes making predictions that the king will march forth or march back; or that our king will attack and the enemy king will retreat, or vice versa; or that our king will triumph and the enemy king will be defeated, or vice versa; and so there will be victory for one and defeat for the other. | T: by such debased arts as making predictions to the effect that: the king will march forth; the king will not march forth; our king will attack and the enemy king will retreat; the enemy king will attack and our king will retreat; our king will triumph and the enemy king will be defeated; the enemy king will triumph and our king will be defeated; thus there will be victory for one and defeat for the other—
dn1:1.23.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from such wrong means of livelihood, from such debased arts.’
dn1:1.23.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.24.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: ‘Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, earn their living by a wrong means of livelihood, by such debased arts as predicting:
dn1:1.24.2 | S: This includes making predictions that there will be an eclipse of the moon, or sun, or stars; that the sun, moon, and stars will be in conjunction or in opposition; that there will be a meteor shower, a fiery horizon, an earthquake, or thunder in the heavens; that there will be a rising, a setting, a darkening, a brightening of the moon, sun, and stars. And it also includes making predictions about the results of all such phenomena. | T: there will be an eclipse of the moon, an eclipse of the sun, an eclipse of a constellation; the sun and the moon will go on their proper courses; there will be an aberration of the sun and moon; the constellations will go on their proper courses; there will be an aberration of a constellation; there will be a fall of meteors; there will be a skyblaze; there will be an earthquake; there will be an earth-roar; there will be a rising and setting, a darkening and brightening, of the moon, sun, and constellations; such will be the result of the moon’s eclipse, such the result of the sun’s eclipse, (and so on down to) such will be the result of the rising and setting, darkening and brightening of the moon, sun, and constellations—
dn1:1.24.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from such wrong means of livelihood, from such debased arts.’
dn1:1.24.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.25.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: ‘Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, earn their living by a wrong means of livelihood, by such debased arts as predicting:
dn1:1.25.2 | S: This includes predicting whether there will be plenty of rain or drought; plenty to eat or famine; an abundant harvest or a bad harvest; security or peril; sickness or health. It also includes such occupations as arithmetic, accounting, calculating, poetry, and cosmology. | T: there will be abundant rain there will be a drought there will be a good harvest there will be a famine there will be security there will be danger there will be sickness there will be health or they earn their living by accounting, computation, calculation, the composing of poetry, and speculations about the world—
dn1:1.25.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from such wrong means of livelihood, from such debased arts.’
dn1:1.25.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.26.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: ‘Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, earn their living by a wrong means of livelihood, by such debased arts as:
dn1:1.26.2 | S: This includes making arrangements for giving and taking in marriage; for engagement and divorce; and for scattering rice inwards or outwards at the wedding ceremony. It also includes casting spells for good or bad luck, treating impacted fetuses, binding the tongue, or locking the jaws; charms for the hands and ears; questioning a mirror, a girl, or a god as an oracle; worshiping the sun, worshiping the Great One, breathing fire, and invoking Siri, the goddess of luck. | T: arranging auspicious dates for marriages, both those in which the bride is brought in (from another family) and those in which she is sent out (to another family) arranging auspicious dates for betrothals and divorces arranging auspicious dates for the accumulation or expenditure of money reciting charms to make people lucky or unlucky rejuvenating the fetuses of abortive women reciting spells to bind a man’s tongue, to paralyze his jaws, to make him lose control over his hands, to make him lose control over his jaw, or to bring on deafness obtaining oracular answers to questions by means of a mirror, a girl, or a god worshipping the sun worshipping Mahābrahmā bringing forth flames from the mouth invoking the goddess of luck—
dn1:1.26.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from such wrong means of livelihood, from such debased arts.’
dn1:1.26.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.27.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: ‘Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, earn their living by a wrong means of livelihood, by such debased arts as:
dn1:1.27.2 | S: This includes rites for propitiation, for granting wishes, for ghosts, for the earth, for rain, for property settlement, and for preparing and consecrating house sites, and rites involving sipping water and bathing, and oblations. It also includes administering emetics, purgatives, expectorants, and phlegmagogues; administering ear-oils, eye restoratives, nasal medicine, ointments, and counter-ointments; surgery with needle and scalpel, treating children, prescribing root medicines, and herbal bandages. | T: promising gifts to deities in return for favours fulfilling such promises demonology reciting spells after entering an earthen house inducing virility and impotence preparing and consecrating sites for a house giving ceremonial mouthwashes and ceremonial bathing offering sacrificial fires administering emetics, purgatives, expectorants and phlegmagogues administering medicine through the ear and through the nose administering ointments and counter-ointments practising fine surgery on the eyes and ears practising general surgery on the body practising as a children’s doctor the application of medicinal roots the binding on of medicinal herbs—
dn1:1.27.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from such wrong means of livelihood, from such debased arts.’
dn1:1.27.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: (none)
dn1:1.27.5 | S: These are the trivial, trifling details of mere ethics that an ordinary person speaks of when they speak praise of the Realized One. | T: “These, bhikkhus, are those trifling and insignificant matters, those minor details of mere moral virtue, that a worldling would refer to when speaking in praise of the Tathāgata.
dn1:1.27.6 | S: The longer section on ethics is complete. | T: (none)
dn1:1.28.0.1 | S: 3. Views | T: III.
dn1:1.28.0.2 | S: 3.1. Theories About the First Beginning | T: Speculations about the Past (Pubbantakappika)
dn1:1.28.1 | S: There are other principles—deep, hard to see, hard to understand, peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of logic, subtle, comprehensible to the astute—which the Realized One makes known after realizing them with his own insight. Those who genuinely praise the Realized One would rightly speak of these things. | T: “There are, bhikkhus, other dhammas, deep, difficult to see, difficult to understand, peaceful and sublime, beyond the sphere of reasoning, subtle, comprehensible only to the wise, which the Tathāgata, having realized for himself with direct knowledge, propounds to others; and it is concerning these that those who would rightly praise the Tathāgata in accordance with reality would speak.
dn1:1.28.2 | S: And what are these principles? | T: And what are these dhammas?
dn1:1.29.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who speculate and theorize about the first beginning, and propose various hypotheses concerning the first beginning on eighteen grounds. | T: “There are, bhikkhus, some recluses and brahmins who are speculators about the past, who hold settled views about the past, and who on eighteen grounds assert various conceptual theorems referring to the past.
dn1:1.29.2 | S: And what are the eighteen grounds on which they rely? | T: And owing to what, with reference to what, do these honourable recluses and brahmins frame their speculations?
dn1:1.30.0 | S: 3.1.1. Eternalism | T: 1. Eternalism (Sassatavāda): Views 1–4
dn1:1.30.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who are eternalists, who assert that the self and the cosmos are eternal on four grounds. | T: “There are, bhikkhus, some recluses and brahmins who are eternalists, and who on four grounds proclaim the self and the world to be eternal.
dn1:1.30.2 | S: And what are the four grounds on which they rely? | T: And owing to what, with reference to what, do these honourable recluses and brahmins proclaim their views?
dn1:1.31.1 | S: It’s when some ascetic or brahmin—by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind—experiences an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they recollect their many kinds of past lives. | T: “In the first case, bhikkhus, some recluse or a brahmin, by means of ardour, endeavour, application, diligence, and right reflection, attains to such a degree of mental concentration that with his mind thus concentrated, [purified, clarified, unblemished, devoid of corruptions], he recollects his numerous past lives:
dn1:1.31.2 | S: That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths. They remember: ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ And so they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details. | T: that is, (he recollects) one birth, two, three, four, or five births; ten, twenty, thirty, forty, or fifty births; a hundred, a thousand, or a hundred thousand births; many hundreds of births, many thousands of births, many hundreds of thousands of births. (He recalls:) ‘Then I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance; such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my span of life. Passing away thence, I re-arose there. There too I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance; such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my span of life. Passing away thence, I re-arose here.’ Thus he recollects his numerous past lives in their modes and their details.
dn1:1.31.3 | S: They say: | T: “He speaks thus:
dn1:1.31.4 | S: ‘The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. | T: ‘The self and the world are eternal, barren, steadfast as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar.
dn1:1.31.5 | S: They remain the same for all eternity, while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and rearise. | T: And though these beings roam and wander (through the round of existence), pass away and re-arise, yet the self and the world remain the same just like eternity itself.
dn1:1.31.6 | S: Why is that? | T: What is the reason?
dn1:1.31.7 | S: Because by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind I experience an immersion of the heart of such a kind that I recollect my many kinds of past lives, | T: Because I, by means of ardour, endeavour, application, diligence, and right reflection, attain to such a degree of mental concentration that with my mind thus concentrated, I recollect my numerous past lives in their modes and their details.
dn1:1.31.8 | S: with features and details. | T: (none)
dn1:1.31.9 | S: Because of this I know: | T: For this reason I know this:
dn1:1.31.10 | S: “The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. | T: the self and the world are eternal, barren, steadfast as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar.
dn1:1.31.11 | S: They remain the same for all eternity, while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and rearise.”’ | T: And though these beings roam and wander (through the round of existence), pass away and re-arise, yet the self and the world remain the same just like eternity itself.’
dn1:1.31.12 | S: This is the first ground on which some ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that the self and the cosmos are eternal. | T: “This, bhikkhus, is the first case.
dn1:1.32.1 | S: And what is the second ground on which they rely? | T: “In the second case, owing to what, with reference to what, are some honourable recluses and brahmins eternalists, who proclaim the self and the world to be eternal?
dn1:1.32.2 | S: It’s when some ascetic or brahmin—by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind—experiences an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they recollect their many kinds of past lives. | T: “Herein, bhikkhus, a certain recluse or brahmin, by means of ardour, endeavour, application, diligence, and right reflection, attains to such a degree of mental concentration that with his mind thus concentrated he recollects his numerous past lives:
dn1:1.32.3 | S: That is: one eon of the cosmos contracting and expanding; two, three, four, five, or ten eons of the cosmos contracting and expanding. They remember: ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ And so they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details. | T: that is, (he recollects his past lives throughout) one aeon of world-contraction and expansion, throughout two, three, four, five, or ten aeons of world-contraction and expansion. (He recalls:) ‘Then I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance; such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my span of life. Passing away thence, I re-arose there. There too I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance; such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my span of life. Passing away thence, I re-arose here.’ Thus he recollects his numerous past lives in their modes and their details.
dn1:1.32.4 | S: They say: | T: “He speaks thus:
dn1:1.32.5 | S: ‘The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. | T: ‘The self and the world are eternal, barren, steadfast as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar.
dn1:1.32.6 | S: They remain the same for all eternity, while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and rearise. | T: And though these beings roam and wander (through the round of existence), pass away and re-arise, yet the self and the world remain the same just like eternity itself.
dn1:1.32.7 | S: Why is that? | T: What is the reason? “ (The remainder is exactly the same as §31 except for the extent of time recollected.)
dn1:1.32.8 | S: Because by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind I experience an immersion of the heart of such a kind that I recollect my many kinds of past lives, | T: (none)
dn1:1.32.9 | S: with features and details. | T: (none)
dn1:1.32.10 | S: Because of this I know: | T: (none)
dn1:1.32.11 | S: “The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. They remain the same for all eternity, while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and rearise.”’ | T: (none)
dn1:1.32.12 | S: This is the second ground on which some ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that the self and the cosmos are eternal. | T: “This, bhikkhus, is the second reason.
dn1:1.33.1 | S: And what is the third ground on which they rely? | T: “In the third case, owing to what, with reference to what, are some honourable recluses and brahmins eternalists, who proclaim the self and the world to be eternal?
dn1:1.33.2 | S: It’s when some ascetic or brahmin—by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind—experiences an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they recollect their many kinds of past lives. | T: “Herein, bhikkhus, some recluse or brahmin, by means of ardour, endeavour, application, diligence, and right reflection, attains to such a degree of mental concentration that with his mind thus concentrated he recollects his numerous past lives:
dn1:1.33.3 | S: That is: ten eons of the cosmos contracting and expanding; twenty, thirty, or forty eons of the cosmos contracting and expanding. They remember: ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ And so they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details. | T: that is, (he recollects his past lives throughout) ten aeons of world-contraction and expansion, throughout twenty, thirty, or forty aeons of world-contraction and expansion … (As above) … Thus he recollects his numerous past lives in their modes and their details.
dn1:1.33.4 | S: They say: | T: “He speaks thus:
dn1:1.33.5 | S: ‘The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. | T: ‘The self and the world are eternal, barren, steadfast as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar.
dn1:1.33.6 | S: They remain the same for all eternity, while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and rearise. | T: And though these beings roam and wander (through the round of existence),
dn1:1.33.7 | S: Why is that? | T: pass away and re-arise, yet the self and the world remain the same just like eternity itself. What is the reason? (As in §31 except for the extent of time.)
dn1:1.33.8 | S: Because by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind I experience an immersion of the heart of such a kind that I recollect my many kinds of past lives, | T: (none)
dn1:1.33.9 | S: with features and details. | T: (none)
dn1:1.33.10 | S: Because of this I know: | T: (none)
dn1:1.33.11 | S: “The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. They remain the same for all eternity, while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and rearise.”’ | T: (none)
dn1:1.33.12 | S: This is the third ground on which some ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that the self and the cosmos are eternal. | T: “This, bhikkhus, is the third case.
dn1:1.34.1 | S: And what is the fourth ground on which they rely? | T: “In the fourth case, owing to what, with reference to what, are some honourable recluses and brahmins eternalists, who proclaim the self and the world to be eternal?
dn1:1.34.2 | S: It’s when some ascetic or brahmin relies on logic and inquiry. They speak of what they have worked out by logic, following a line of inquiry, expressing their own perspective: | T: “Herein, bhikkhus, some recluse or brahmin is a rationalist, an investigator. He declares his view—hammered out by reason, deduced from his investigations, following his own flight of thought—thus:
dn1:1.34.3 | S: ‘The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. | T: “The self and the world are eternal, barren, steadfast as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar.
dn1:1.34.4 | S: They remain the same for all eternity, while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and rearise.’ | T: And though these beings roam and wander (through the round of existence), pass away and re-arise, yet the self and the world remain the same just like eternity itself.’
dn1:1.34.5 | S: This is the fourth ground on which some ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that the self and the cosmos are eternal. | T: “This, bhikkhus, is the fourth case.
dn1:1.35.1 | S: These are the four grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins assert that the self and the cosmos are eternal. | T: “It is on these four grounds, bhikkhus, that those recluses and brahmins who are eternalists proclaim the self and the world to be eternal.
dn1:1.35.2 | S: Any ascetics and brahmins who assert that the self and the cosmos are eternal do so on one or other of these four grounds. Outside of this there is none. | T: Whatever recluses and brahmins there may be who proclaim the self and the world to be eternal, all of them do so on these four grounds or on a certain one of them. Outside of these there is none.
dn1:1.36.1 | S: The Realized One understands this: | T: “This, bhikkhus, the Tathāgata understands. And he understands:
dn1:1.36.2 | S: ‘If you hold on to and attach to these grounds for views it leads to such a destiny in the next life.’ | T: ‘These standpoints, thus assumed and thus misapprehended, lead to such a future destination,
dn1:1.36.3 | S: He understands this, and what goes beyond this. And since he does not misapprehend that understanding, he has realized quenching within himself. | T: to such a state in the world beyond.’ He understands as well what transcends this, yet even that understanding he does not misapprehend. And because he is free from misapprehension, he has realized within himself the state of perfect peace.
dn1:1.36.4 | S: Having truly understood the origin, disappearance, gratification, drawback, and escape from feelings, the Realized One is freed by not grasping. | T: Having understood as they really are the origin and the passing away of feelings, their satisfaction, their unsatisfactoriness, and the escape from them, the Tathāgata, bhikkhus, is emancipated through non-clinging.
