## an5.52
an5.52:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, rightly speaking, you’d call the five hindrances a ‘heap of the unskillful’. | T: “Bhikkhus, saying ‘a heap of the unwholesome,’ it is about the five hindrances that one could rightly say this.
an5.52:1.2 | S: For these five hindrances are entirely a heap of the unskillful. | T: For the five hindrances are a complete heap of the unwholesome.
an5.52:1.3 | S: What five? | T: What five?
an5.52:1.4 | S: The hindrances of sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. | T: The hindrance of sensual desire, the hindrance of ill will, the hindrance of dullness and drowsiness, the hindrance of restlessness and remorse, and the hindrance of doubt.
an5.52:1.5 | S: Rightly speaking, you’d call these five hindrances a ‘heap of the unskillful’. | T: Bhikkhus, saying ‘a heap of the unwholesome,’ it is about these five hindrances that one could rightly say this.
an5.52:1.6 | S: For these five hindrances are entirely a heap of the unskillful.” | T: For these five hindrances are a complete heap of the unwholesome.”

## an5.54
an5.54:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, there are five times that are not good for meditation. | T: “Bhikkhus, there are these five unfavorable occasions for striving.
an5.54:1.2 | S: What five? | T: What five?
an5.54:1.3 | S: Firstly, a mendicant is old, overcome with old age. | T: (1) “Here, a bhikkhu is old, overcome by old age.
an5.54:1.4 | S: This is the first time that’s not good for meditation. | T: This is the first unfavorable occasion for striving.
an5.54:2.1 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant is sick, overcome by sickness. | T: (2) “Again, a bhikkhu is ill, overcome by illness.
an5.54:2.2 | S: This is the second time that’s not good for meditation. | T: This is the second unfavorable occasion for striving.
an5.54:3.1 | S: Furthermore, there’s a famine, a bad harvest, so it’s hard to get almsfood, and not easy to keep going by collecting alms. | T: (3) “Again, there is a famine, a poor harvest, a time when almsfood is difficult to obtain and it is not easy to subsist by means of gleaning.
an5.54:3.2 | S: This is the third time that’s not good for meditation. | T: This is the third unfavorable occasion for striving.
an5.54:4.1 | S: Furthermore, there’s peril due to turmoil in the wilds, so the countryfolk mount their vehicles and flee everywhere. | T: (4) “Again, there is peril, turbulence in the wilderness, and the people of the countryside, mounted on their vehicles, flee on all sides.
an5.54:4.2 | S: This is the fourth time that’s not good for meditation. | T: This is the fourth unfavorable occasion for striving.
an5.54:5.1 | S: Furthermore, there’s a schism in the Saṅgha. | T: (5) “Again, there is a schism in the Saṅgha,
an5.54:5.2 | S: When the Saṅgha is split, they abuse, insult, block, and forsake each other. | T: and when there is a schism in the Saṅgha there are mutual insults, mutual reviling, mutual disparagement, and mutual rejection.
an5.54:5.3 | S: This doesn’t inspire confidence in those without it, and it causes some with confidence to change their minds. | T: Then those without confidence do not gain confidence, while some of those with confidence change their minds.
an5.54:5.4 | S: This is the fifth time that’s not good for meditation. | T: This is the fifth unfavorable occasion for striving.
an5.54:5.5 | S: These are the five times that are not good for meditation. | T: “These are the five unfavorable occasions for striving.
an5.54:6.1 | S: There are five times that are good for meditation. | T: “There are, bhikkhus, these five favorable occasions for striving.
an5.54:6.2 | S: What five? | T: What five?
an5.54:6.3 | S: Firstly, a mendicant is a youth, young, with pristine black hair, blessed with youth, in the prime of life. | T: (1) “Here, a bhikkhu is young, a black-haired young man endowed with the blessing of youth, in the prime of life.
an5.54:6.4 | S: This is the first time that’s good for meditation. | T: This is the first favorable occasion for striving.
an5.54:7.1 | S: Furthermore, they are rarely ill or unwell. Their stomach digests well, being neither too hot nor too cold, but just right, and fit for meditation. | T: (2) “Again, a bhikkhu is seldom ill or afflicted, possessing an even digestion that is neither too cool nor too hot but moderate and suitable for striving.
an5.54:7.2 | S: This is the second time that’s good for meditation. | T: This is the second favorable occasion for striving.
an5.54:8.1 | S: Furthermore, there’s plenty of food, a good harvest, so it’s easy to get almsfood, and easy to keep going by collecting alms. | T: (3) “Again, food is plentiful; there has been a good harvest and almsfood is abundant, so that one can easily sustain oneself by means of gleaning.
an5.54:8.2 | S: This is the third time that’s good for meditation. | T: This is the third favorable occasion for striving.
an5.54:9.1 | S: Furthermore, people live in harmony, appreciating each other, without dispute, blending like milk and water, and regarding each other with kindly eyes. | T: (4) “Again, people are dwelling in concord, harmoniously, without disputes, blending like milk and water, viewing each other with eyes of affection.
an5.54:9.2 | S: This is the fourth time that’s good for meditation. | T: This is the fourth favorable occasion for striving.
an5.54:10.1 | S: Furthermore, the Saṅgha lives comfortably, in harmony, appreciating each other, without dispute, with one recitation. | T: (5) “Again, the Saṅgha is dwelling at ease—in concord, harmoniously, without disputes, with a single recitation.
an5.54:10.2 | S: When the Saṅgha is in harmony, they don’t abuse, insult, block, or forsake each other. | T: When the Saṅgha is in concord, there are no mutual insults, no mutual reviling, no mutual disparagement, and no mutual rejection.
an5.54:10.3 | S: This inspires confidence in those without it, and increases confidence in those who have it. | T: Then those without confidence gain confidence and those with confidence increase in their confidence.
an5.54:10.4 | S: This is the fifth time that’s good for meditation. | T: This is the fifth favorable occasion for striving.
an5.54:10.5 | S: These are the five times that are good for meditation.” | T: “These are the five favorable occasions for striving.”

## an5.59
an5.59:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, it’s hard to find someone gone forth when old who has five qualities. | T: “Bhikkhus, it is rare to find one gone forth in old age who possesses five qualities.
an5.59:1.2 | S: What five? | T: What five?
an5.59:1.3 | S: It’s hard to find someone gone forth when old who is sophisticated, well-mannered, and learned, who can teach Dhamma, and has memorized the monastic law. | T: It is rare to find one gone forth in old age (1) who is astute; (2) who has the proper manner; (3) who is learned; (4) who can speak on the Dhamma; and (5) who is an expert on the discipline.
an5.59:1.4 | S: It’s hard to find someone gone forth when old who possesses these five qualities.” | T: It is rare to find one gone forth in old age who possesses these five qualities.”

## an5.5
an5.5:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, any monk or nun who resigns the training and returns to a lesser life deserves rebuttal and criticism on five legitimate grounds in this very life. | T: “Bhikkhus, any bhikkhu or bhikkhunī who gives up the training and reverts to the lower life incurs five reasonable criticisms and grounds for censure in this very life.
an5.5:1.2 | S: What five? | T: What five?
an5.5:1.3 | S: ‘You had no faith, conscience, prudence, energy, or wisdom regarding skillful qualities.’ | T: (1) ‘You did not have faith in cultivating wholesome qualities. (2) You did not have a sense of moral shame in cultivating wholesome qualities. (3) You did not have moral dread in cultivating wholesome qualities. (4) You did not have energy in cultivating wholesome qualities. (5) You did not have wisdom in cultivating wholesome qualities.’
an5.5:1.4 | S: Any monk or nun who resigns the training and returns to a lesser life deserves rebuttal and criticism on these five legitimate grounds in this very life. | T: Any bhikkhu or bhikkhunī who gives up the training and reverts to the lower life incurs these five reasonable criticisms and grounds for censure in this very life.
an5.5:2.1 | S: Any monk or nun who lives the full and pure spiritual life in pain and sadness, weeping, with tearful face, deserves praise on five legitimate grounds in this very life. | T: “Bhikkhus, any bhikkhu or bhikkhunī who lives the complete and pure spiritual life, even with pain and dejection, weeping with a tearful face, gains five reasonable grounds for praise in this very life.
an5.5:2.2 | S: What five? | T: What five?
an5.5:2.3 | S: ‘You had faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom regarding skillful qualities.’ | T: (1) ‘You have had faith in cultivating wholesome qualities. (2) You have had a sense of moral shame in cultivating wholesome qualities. (3) You have had moral dread in cultivating wholesome qualities. (4) You have had energy in cultivating wholesome qualities. (5) You have had wisdom in cultivating wholesome qualities.’
an5.5:2.4 | S: Any monk or nun who lives the full and pure spiritual life in pain and sadness, weeping, with tearful face, deserves praise on these five legitimate grounds in this very life.” | T: Any bhikkhu or bhikkhunī who lives the complete and pure spiritual life, even with pain and dejection, weeping with a tearful face, gains these five reasonable grounds for praise in this very life.”

## an5.60
an5.60:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, it’s hard to find someone gone forth when old who has five qualities. | T: “Bhikkhus, it is rare to find one gone forth in old age who possesses five qualities.
an5.60:1.2 | S: What five? | T: What five?
an5.60:1.3 | S: It’s hard to find someone gone forth when old who is easy to admonish, retains what they learn, and learns respectfully, who can teach the Dhamma, and has memorized the monastic law. | T: It is rare to find one gone forth in old age (1) who is easy to correct; (2) who firmly retains in mind what he has learned; (3) who accepts instruction respectfully; (4) who can speak on the Dhamma; and (5) who is an expert on the discipline.
an5.60:1.4 | S: It’s hard to find someone gone forth when old who possesses these five qualities.” | T: It is rare to find one gone forth in old age who possesses these five qualities.”

## an5.61
an5.61:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, these five perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are very fruitful and beneficial. They have freedom from death as their objective and culmination. | T: “Bhikkhus, these five perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as their consummation.
an5.61:1.2 | S: What five? | T: What five?
an5.61:1.3 | S: The perceptions of ugliness, death, drawbacks, repulsiveness of food, and dissatisfaction with the whole world. | T: The perception of unattractiveness, the perception of death, the perception of danger, the perception of the repulsiveness of food, and the perception of non-delight in the entire world.
an5.61:1.4 | S: These five perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are very fruitful and beneficial. They have freedom from death as their objective and culmination.” | T: These five perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as their consummation.”

## an5.62
an5.62:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, these five perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are very fruitful and beneficial. They have freedom from death as their objective and culmination. | T: “Bhikkhus, these five perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as their consummation.
an5.62:1.2 | S: What five? | T: What five?
an5.62:1.3 | S: The perceptions of impermanence, not-self, death, repulsiveness of food, and dissatisfaction with the whole world. | T: The perception of impermanence, the perception of non-self, the perception of death, the perception of the repulsiveness of food, and the perception of non-delight in the entire world.
an5.62:1.4 | S: These five perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are very fruitful and beneficial. They have freedom from death as their objective and culmination.” | T: These five perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as their consummation.”

## an5.63
an5.63:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, a male noble disciple who grows in five ways grows nobly, taking on what is essential and excellent in this life. | T: “Bhikkhus, growing in five ways, a male noble disciple grows by a noble growth, and he absorbs the essence and the best of this life.
an5.63:1.2 | S: What five? | T: What five?
an5.63:1.3 | S: He grows in faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. | T: He grows in faith, virtuous behavior, learning, generosity, and wisdom.
an5.63:1.4 | S: A male noble disciple who grows in these five ways grows nobly, taking on what is essential and excellent in this life. | T: Growing in these five ways, a male noble disciple grows by a noble growth, and he absorbs the essence and the best of this life.”
an5.63:2.1 | S: He who grows in faith and ethics, | T: He who grows in faith and virtuous behavior,
an5.63:2.2 | S: wisdom, and both generosity and learning— | T: in wisdom, generosity, and learning—
an5.63:2.3 | S: a good man such as he sees clearly, | T: such a discerning superior man
an5.63:2.4 | S: and takes on what is essential for himself in this life.” | T: absorbs for himself the essence of this life.

## an5.64
an5.64:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, a female noble disciple who grows in five ways grows nobly, taking on what is essential and excellent in this life. | T: “Bhikkhus, growing in five ways, a female noble disciple grows by a noble growth, and she absorbs the essence and the best of this life.
an5.64:1.2 | S: What five? | T: What five?
an5.64:1.3 | S: She grows in faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. | T: She grows in faith, virtuous behavior, learning, generosity, and wisdom.
an5.64:1.4 | S: A female noble disciple who grows in these five ways grows nobly, taking on what is essential and excellent in this life. | T: Growing in these five ways, a female noble disciple grows by a noble growth, and she absorbs the essence and the best of this life.”
an5.64:2.1 | S: She who grows in faith and ethics, | T: She who grows in faith and virtuous behavior,
an5.64:2.2 | S: wisdom, and both generosity and learning— | T: in wisdom, generosity, and learning—
an5.64:2.3 | S: a virtuous laywoman such as she | T: such a virtuous female lay follower
an5.64:2.4 | S: takes on what is essential for herself in this life.” | T: absorbs for herself the essence of this life.

## an5.6
an5.6:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, you don’t become unskillful as long as faith is established in skillful qualities. | T: (1) “Bhikkhus, there is no entering upon the unwholesome so long as faith is securely settled in cultivating wholesome qualities.
an5.6:1.2 | S: But when faith vanishes and faithlessness takes over, | T: But when faith has disappeared and lack of faith obsesses one,
an5.6:1.3 | S: you become unskillful. | T: then there is the entering upon the unwholesome.
an5.6:2.1 | S: You don’t become unskillful as long as conscience … prudence … energy … wisdom is established in skillful qualities. | T: (2) “There is no entering upon the unwholesome so long as a sense of moral shame is securely settled in cultivating wholesome qualities. But when a sense of moral shame has disappeared and moral shamelessness obsesses one, then there is the entering upon the unwholesome. (3) “There is no entering upon the unwholesome so long as moral dread is securely settled in cultivating wholesome qualities. But when moral dread has disappeared and lack of moral dread obsesses one,
an5.6:2.3 | P: atha akusalassa samāpatti hoti. | T: then there is the entering upon the unwholesome.
an5.6:4.1 | P: Na tāva, bhikkhave, akusalassa samāpatti hoti yāva vīriyaṁ paccupaṭṭhitaṁ hoti kusalesu dhammesu. | T: (4) “There is no entering upon the unwholesome so long as energy is securely settled in cultivating wholesome qualities.
an5.6:4.2 | P: Yato ca kho, bhikkhave, vīriyaṁ antarahitaṁ hoti, kosajjaṁ pariyuṭṭhāya tiṭṭhati; | T: But when energy has disappeared and laziness obsesses one,
an5.6:4.3 | P: atha akusalassa samāpatti hoti. | T: then there is the entering upon the unwholesome.
an5.6:5.1 | P: Na tāva, bhikkhave, akusalassa samāpatti hoti yāva paññā paccupaṭṭhitā hoti kusalesu dhammesu. | T: (5) “There is no entering upon the unwholesome so long as wisdom is securely settled in cultivating wholesome qualities.
an5.6:5.2 | S: But when wisdom vanishes and witlessness takes over, | T: But when wisdom has disappeared and lack of wisdom obsesses one,
an5.6:5.3 | S: you become unskillful.” | T: then there is the entering upon the unwholesome.”

## an5.8
an5.8:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities fails, and doesn’t establish themselves in the true teaching. | T: “Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities a bhikkhu falls away and is not established in the good Dhamma.
an5.8:1.2 | S: What five? | T: What five?
an5.8:1.3 | S: A mendicant who is faithless … | T: (1) A bhikkhu devoid of faith falls away and is not established in the good Dhamma.
an5.8:1.4 | S: shameless … | T: (2) A morally shameless bhikkhu …
an5.8:1.5 | S: imprudent … | T: (3) A morally reckless bhikkhu …
an5.8:1.6 | S: lazy … | T: (4) A lazy bhikkhu …
an5.8:1.7 | S: witless fails, and doesn’t establish themselves in the true teaching. | T: (5) An unwise bhikkhu falls away and is not established in the good Dhamma.
an5.8:1.8 | S: A mendicant with these five qualities fails, and doesn’t establish themselves in the true teaching. | T: Possessing these five qualities, a bhikkhu falls away and is not established in the good Dhamma.
an5.8:2.1 | S: A mendicant with five qualities doesn’t fail, and establishes themselves in the true teaching. | T: “Bhikkhus, possessing five other qualities a bhikkhu does not fall away but is established in the good Dhamma.
an5.8:2.2 | S: What five? | T: What five?
an5.8:2.3 | S: A mendicant who is faithful … | T: (1) A bhikkhu endowed with faith does not fall away but is established in the good Dhamma.
an5.8:2.4 | S: conscientious … | T: (2) A bhikkhu who has a sense of moral shame …
an5.8:2.5 | S: prudent … | T: (3) A bhikkhu who has moral dread …
an5.8:2.6 | S: energetic … | T: (4) An energetic bhikkhu …
an5.8:2.7 | S: wise doesn’t fail, and establishes themselves in the true teaching. | T: (5) A wise bhikkhu does not fall away but is established in the good Dhamma.
an5.8:2.8 | S: A mendicant with these five qualities doesn’t fail, and establishes themselves in the true teaching.” | T: Possessing these five qualities, a bhikkhu does not fall away but is established in the good Dhamma.”

## an8.118
an8.118:1.1 | S: “For insight into greed, eight things should be developed. | T: “Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, eight things are to be developed.
an8.118:1.2 | S: What eight? | T: What eight?
an8.118:1.3 | S: Right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. | T: Right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
an8.118:1.4 | S: For insight into greed, these eight things should be developed.” | T: For direct knowledge of lust, these eight things are to be developed.”

## an8.119
an8.119:1.1 | S: “For insight into greed, eight things should be developed. | T: “Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, eight things are to be developed.
an8.119:1.2 | S: What eight? | T: What eight?
an8.119:1.3 | S: Perceiving form internally, they see forms externally, limited, both pretty and ugly. | T: (1) One percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, limited, beautiful or ugly.
an8.119:1.4 | S: Mastering them, they perceive: ‘I know and see.’ | T: Having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see.’
an8.119:1.5 | S: Perceiving form internally, they see forms externally, limitless, both pretty and ugly. … | T: (2) One percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, measureless, beautiful or ugly. Having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see.’
an8.119:1.6 | S: Not perceiving form internally, they see forms externally, limited, both pretty and ugly. … | T: (3) One not percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, limited, beautiful or ugly. Having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see.’
an8.119:1.7 | S: Not perceiving form internally, they see forms externally, limitless, both pretty and ugly. … | T: (4) One not percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, measureless, beautiful or ugly. Having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see.’
an8.119:1.8 | S: Not perceiving form internally, they see forms externally, blue, with blue color and blue appearance. … | T: (5) One not percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, blue ones, blue in color, with a blue hue, with a blue tint …
an8.119:1.9 | S: yellow … | T: (6) … yellow ones, yellow in color, with a yellow hue, with a yellow tint …
an8.119:1.10 | S: red … | T: (7) … red ones, red in color, with a red hue, with a red tint …
an8.119:1.11 | S: Not perceiving form internally, they see forms externally, white, with white color and white appearance. | T: (8) … white ones, white in color, with a white hue, with a white tint.
an8.119:1.12 | S: Mastering them, they perceive: ‘I know and see.’ | T: Having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see.’
an8.119:1.13 | S: For insight into greed, these eight things should be developed.” | T: For direct knowledge of lust, these eight things are to be developed.”

## an8.11
an8.11:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
an8.11:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying in Verañjā at the root of a neem tree dedicated to Naḷeru. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Verañjā at the foot of Naḷeru’s neem tree.
an8.11:1.3 | S: Then the brahmin Verañja went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. | T: Then a brahmin of Verañjā approached the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him.
an8.11:1.4 | S: When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha: | T: When he had concluded his greetings and cordial talk, he sat down to one side and said to the Blessed One:
an8.11:2.1 | S: “Worthy Gotama, I have heard that | T: “I have heard, Master Gotama:
an8.11:2.2 | S: the ascetic Gotama doesn’t bow to old brahmins, the elderly and senior, who are advanced in years and have reached the final stage of life; nor does he rise in their presence or offer them a seat. | T: ‘The ascetic Gotama does not pay homage to brahmins who are old, aged, burdened with years, advanced in life, come to the last stage; nor does he stand up for them or offer them a seat.’
an8.11:2.3 | S: And this is indeed the case, | T: This is indeed true,
an8.11:2.4 | S: for the worthy Gotama does not bow to old brahmins, elderly and senior, who are advanced in years and have reached the final stage of life; nor does he rise in their presence or offer them a seat. | T: for Master Gotama does not pay homage to brahmins who are old, aged, burdened with years, advanced in life, come to the last stage; nor does he stand up for them or offer them a seat.
an8.11:2.5 | S: This is not appropriate, worthy Gotama.” | T: This is not proper, Master Gotama.”
an8.11:2.6 | S: “Brahmin, I don’t see anyone in this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans—for whom I should bow down or rise up or offer a seat. | T: “Brahmin, in the world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, in this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans, I do not see one to whom I should pay homage, or for whom I should stand up, or whom I should offer a seat.
an8.11:2.7 | S: If the Realized One bowed down or rose up or offered a seat to anyone, their head would explode!” | T: For if the Tathāgata should pay homage to anyone, or stand up for him, or offer him a seat, even that person’s head would split.”
an8.11:3.1 | S: “Worthy Gotama lacks taste.” | T: (1) “Master Gotama lacks taste.”
an8.11:3.2 | S: “There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say | T: “There is, brahmin, a way in which one could rightly say of me:
an8.11:3.3 | S: that I lack taste. | T: ‘The ascetic Gotama lacks taste.’
an8.11:3.4 | S: For the Realized One has given up taste for sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches. It’s cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. | T: The Tathāgata has abandoned his taste for forms, sounds, odors, tastes, and tactile objects; he has cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising.
an8.11:3.5 | S: In this sense you could rightly say that I lack taste. | T: It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama lacks taste.’
an8.11:3.6 | S: But that’s not what you’re talking about.” | T: But you did not speak with reference to this.”
an8.11:4.1 | S: “Worthy Gotama is indelicate.” | T: (2) “Master Gotama is not convivial.”
an8.11:4.2 | S: “There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say | T: “There is, brahmin, a way in which one could rightly say of me:
an8.11:4.3 | S: that I’m indelicate. | T: ‘The ascetic Gotama is not convivial.’
an8.11:4.4 | S: For the Realized One has given up delight in sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches. It’s cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. | T: The Tathāgata has abandoned conviviality with forms, sounds, odors, tastes, and tactile objects; he has cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising.
an8.11:4.5 | S: In this sense you could rightly say that I’m indelicate. | T: It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is not convivial.’
an8.11:4.6 | S: But that’s not what you’re talking about.” | T: But you did not speak with reference to this.”
an8.11:5.1 | S: “Worthy Gotama is a teacher of inaction.” | T: (3) “Master Gotama is a proponent of non-doing.”
an8.11:5.2 | S: “There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say that | T: “There is, brahmin, a way in which one could rightly say of me:
an8.11:5.3 | S: I’m a teacher of inaction. | T: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a proponent of non-doing.’
an8.11:5.4 | S: For I teach inaction regarding bad bodily, verbal, and mental conduct, and the many kinds of unskillful things. | T: For I assert the non-doing of bodily, verbal, and mental misconduct; I assert the non-doing of the numerous kinds of bad unwholesome deeds.
an8.11:5.5 | S: In this sense you could rightly say that I’m a teacher of inaction. | T: It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a proponent of non-doing.’
an8.11:5.6 | S: But that’s not what you’re talking about.” | T: But you did not speak with reference to this.”
an8.11:6.1 | S: “Worthy Gotama is a teacher of annihilationism.” | T: (4) “Master Gotama is an annihilationist.”
an8.11:6.2 | S: “There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say that | T: “There is, brahmin, a way in which one could rightly say of me:
an8.11:6.3 | S: I’m a teacher of annihilationism. | T: ‘The ascetic Gotama is an annihilationist.’
an8.11:6.4 | S: For I teach the annihilation of greed, hate, and delusion, and the many kinds of unskillful things. | T: For I assert the annihilation of lust, hatred, and delusion; I assert the annihilation of the numerous kinds of bad unwholesome qualities.
an8.11:6.5 | S: In this sense you could rightly say that I’m a teacher of annihilationism. | T: It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is an annihilationist.’
an8.11:6.6 | S: But that’s not what you’re talking about.” | T: But you did not speak with reference to this.”
an8.11:7.1 | S: “Worthy Gotama is disgusted.” | T: (5) “Master Gotama is a repeller.”
an8.11:7.2 | S: “There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say that | T: “There is, brahmin, a way in which one could rightly say of me:
an8.11:7.3 | S: I’m disgusted. | T: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a repeller.’
an8.11:7.4 | S: For I’m disgusted by bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and by attainment of the many kinds of unskillful things. | T: For I am repelled by bodily, verbal, and mental misconduct; I am repelled by the acquisition of the numerous kinds of bad unwholesome qualities.
an8.11:7.5 | S: In this sense you could rightly say that I’m disgusted. | T: It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a repeller.’
an8.11:7.6 | S: But that’s not what you’re talking about.” | T: But you did not speak with reference to this.”
an8.11:8.1 | S: “Worthy Gotama is an exterminator.” | T: (6) “Master Gotama is an abolitionist.”
an8.11:8.2 | S: “There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say that | T: “There is, brahmin, a way in which one could rightly say of me:
an8.11:8.3 | S: I’m an exterminator. | T: ‘The ascetic Gotama is an abolitionist.’
an8.11:8.4 | S: For I teach the extermination of greed, hate, and delusion, and the many kinds of unskillful things. | T: For I teach the Dhamma for the abolition of lust, hatred, and delusion; I teach the Dhamma for the abolition of the numerous kinds of bad unwholesome qualities.
an8.11:8.5 | S: In this sense you could rightly say that I’m an exterminator. | T: It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is an abolitionist.’
an8.11:8.6 | S: But that’s not what you’re talking about.” | T: But you did not speak with reference to this.”
an8.11:9.1 | S: “Worthy Gotama is a mortifier.” | T: (7) “Master Gotama is a tormentor.”
an8.11:9.2 | S: “There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say that | T: “There is, brahmin, a way in which one could rightly say of me:
an8.11:9.3 | S: I’m a mortifier. | T: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a tormentor.’
an8.11:9.4 | S: For I say that bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind should be mortified. | T: For I assert that bad unwholesome qualities—bodily, verbal, and mental misconduct—are to be burned up.
an8.11:9.5 | S: I say that a mortifier is someone who has given up unskillful qualities that should be mortified. They’ve cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so that they’re unable to arise in the future. | T: I say that someone is a tormentor when he has abandoned the bad unwholesome qualities that are to be burned up; when he has cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them so that they are no more subject to future arising.
an8.11:9.6 | S: The Realized One is someone who has given up unskillful qualities that should be mortified. He has cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so that they’re unable to arise in the future. | T: The Tathāgata has abandoned the bad unwholesome qualities that are to be burned up; he has cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them so that they are no more subject to future arising.
an8.11:9.7 | S: In this sense you could rightly say that I’m a mortifier. | T: It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a tormentor.’
an8.11:9.8 | S: But that’s not what you’re talking about.” | T: But you did not speak with reference to this.”
an8.11:10.1 | S: “Worthy Gotama is gutless.” | T: (8) “Master Gotama is retiring.”
an8.11:10.2 | S: “There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say that | T: “There is, brahmin, a way in which one could rightly say of me:
an8.11:10.3 | S: I am gutless. | T: ‘The ascetic Gotama is retiring.’
an8.11:10.4 | S: I say that a gutless person is someone who has given up future wombs and regeneration into a new state of existence. They’ve cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so that they’re unable to arise in the future. | T: For I say that someone is retiring when he has abandoned the production of renewed existence, the future bed of the womb; when he has cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising.
an8.11:10.5 | S: The Realized One has given up future wombs and regeneration into a new state of existence. He has cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so that they’re unable to arise in the future. | T: The Tathāgata has abandoned the production of renewed existence, the future bed of the womb; he has cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising.
an8.11:10.6 | S: In this sense you could rightly say that I am gutless. | T: It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is retiring.’
an8.11:10.7 | S: But that’s not what you’re talking about. | T: But you did not speak with reference to this.
an8.11:11.1 | S: Suppose, brahmin, there was a chicken with eight or ten or twelve eggs. | T: “Suppose, brahmin, there was a hen with eight, ten, or twelve eggs that she had properly covered,
an8.11:11.2 | S: And she properly sat on them to keep them warm and incubated. | T: incubated, and nurtured.
an8.11:11.3 | S: Now, the chick that is first to break out of the eggshell with its claws and beak and hatch safely: should that be called the eldest or the youngest?” | T: Should the first among those chicks to pierce its shell with the points of its claws or beak and safely hatch be called the eldest or the youngest?”
an8.11:11.4 | S: “Worthy Gotama, that should be called the eldest. For it is the eldest among them.” | T: “It should be called the eldest, Master Gotama. So it is the eldest among them.”
an8.11:12.1 | S: “In the same way, in this population lost in ignorance, swaddled in their shells, I alone have broken open the egg of ignorance and realized the supreme perfect awakening. | T: “So too, brahmin, in a population immersed in ignorance, become like an egg, completely enveloped, I have pierced the eggshell of ignorance. I am the sole person in the world who has awakened to the unsurpassed perfect enlightenment.
an8.11:12.2 | S: So, brahmin, I am the eldest and the first in the world. | T: So I am the eldest, the best in the world.
an8.11:13.1 | S: My energy was roused up and unflagging, my mindfulness was established and lucid, my body was tranquil and undisturbed, and my mind was immersed and unified in samādhi. | T: “My energy, brahmin, was aroused without slackening; my mindfulness was established without confusion; my body was tranquil without disturbance; my mind was concentrated and one-pointed.
an8.11:13.2 | S: Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, I entered and remained in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: Secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, I entered and dwelled in the first jhāna, which consists of rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by thought and examination.
an8.11:13.3 | S: As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected were stilled, I entered and remained in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: With the subsiding of thought and examination, I entered and dwelled in the second jhāna, which has internal placidity and unification of mind and consists of rapture and pleasure born of concentration, without thought and examination.
an8.11:13.4 | S: And with the fading away of rapture, I entered and remained in the third absorption, where I meditated with equanimity, mindful and aware, experiencing for themselves the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’ | T: With the fading away as well of rapture, I dwelled equanimous and, mindful and clearly comprehending, I experienced pleasure with the body; I entered and dwelled in the third jhāna of which the noble ones declare: ‘He is equanimous, mindful, one who dwells happily.’
an8.11:13.5 | S: With the giving up of pleasure and pain, and the disappearance of former happiness and sadness, I entered and remained in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. | T: With the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous passing away of joy and dejection, I entered and dwelled in the fourth jhāna, neither painful nor pleasant, which has purification of mindfulness by equanimity.
an8.11:14.1 | S: When my mind had immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—I extended it toward recollection of past lives. | T: “When my mind was thus concentrated, purified, cleansed, unblemished, rid of defilement, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, I directed it to the knowledge of the recollection of past abodes.
an8.11:14.2 | S: I recollected many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. I remembered: ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ And so I recollected my many kinds of past lives, with features and details. | T: I recollected my manifold past abodes, that is, one birth, two births, three births, four births, five births, ten births, twenty births, thirty births, forty births, fifty births, a hundred births, a thousand births, a hundred thousand births, many eons of world-dissolution, many eons of world-evolution, many eons of world-dissolution and world-evolution thus: ‘There I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life span; passing away from there, I was reborn elsewhere, and there too I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life span; passing away from there, I was reborn here.’ Thus I recollected my manifold past abodes with their aspects and details.
an8.11:15.1 | S: This was the first knowledge, which I achieved in the first watch of the night. | T: “This, brahmin, was the first true knowledge attained by me in the first watch of the night.
an8.11:15.2 | S: Ignorance was banished and knowledge arose; darkness was banished and light arose, as happens for a meditator who is diligent, keen, and resolute. | T: Ignorance was dispelled, true knowledge had arisen; darkness was dispelled, light had arisen, as happens when one dwells heedful, ardent, and resolute.
an8.11:15.3 | S: This was my first breaking out, like a chick breaking out of the eggshell. | T: This, brahmin, was my first breaking out, like that of the chick breaking out of the eggshell.
an8.11:16.1 | S: When my mind had immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—I extended it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings. | T: “When my mind was thus concentrated, purified, cleansed, unblemished, rid of defilement, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, I directed it to the knowledge of the passing away and rebirth of beings.
an8.11:16.2 | S: With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, I saw sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. I understood how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds: ‘These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’ And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, I saw sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. I understood how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. | T: With the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, I saw beings passing away and being reborn, inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and I understood how beings fare in accordance with their kamma thus: ‘These beings who engaged in misconduct by body, speech, and mind, who reviled the noble ones, held wrong view, and undertook kamma based on wrong view, with the breakup of the body, after death, have been reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell; but these beings who engaged in good conduct by body, speech, and mind, who did not revile the noble ones, who held right view, and undertook kamma based on right view, with the breakup of the body, after death, have been reborn in a good destination, in the heavenly world.’ Thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, I saw beings passing away and being reborn, inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and I understood how beings fare in accordance with their kamma.
an8.11:17.1 | S: This was the second knowledge, which I achieved in the middle watch of the night. | T: “This, brahmin, was the second true knowledge attained by me in the middle watch of the night.
an8.11:17.2 | S: Ignorance was banished and knowledge arose; darkness was banished and light arose, as happens for a meditator who is diligent, keen, and resolute. | T: Ignorance was dispelled, true knowledge had arisen; darkness was dispelled, light had arisen, as happens when one dwells heedful, ardent, and resolute.
an8.11:17.3 | S: This was my second breaking out, like a chick breaking out of the eggshell. | T: This, brahmin, was my second breaking out, like that of the chick breaking out of the eggshell.
an8.11:18.1 | S: When my mind had immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—I extended it toward knowledge of the ending of defilements. | T: “When my mind was thus concentrated, purified, cleansed, unblemished, rid of defilement, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, I directed it to the knowledge of the destruction of the taints.
an8.11:18.2 | S: I truly understood: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. | T: I understood as it really is: ‘This is suffering’; I understood as it really is: ‘This is the origin of suffering’; I understood as it really is: ‘This is the cessation of suffering’; I understood as it really is: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
an8.11:18.3 | S: I truly understood: ‘These are defilements’ … ‘This is the origin of defilements’ … ‘This is the cessation of defilements’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements’. | T: I understood as it really is: ‘These are the taints’; I understood as it really is: ‘This is the origin of the taints’; I understood as it really is: ‘This is the cessation of the taints’; I understood as it really is: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of the taints.’
an8.11:18.4 | S: Knowing and seeing like this, my mind was freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. | T: “When I knew and saw thus, my mind was liberated from the taint of sensuality, from the taint of existence, and from the taint of ignorance.
an8.11:18.5 | S: When it was freed, I knew it was freed. | T: When it was liberated there came the knowledge: ‘It’s liberated.’ I directly knew:
an8.11:18.6 | S: I understood: ‘Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further for this place.’ | T: ‘Destroyed is birth, the spiritual life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming back to any state of being.’
an8.11:19.1 | S: This was the third knowledge, which I achieved in the last watch of the night. | T: “This, brahmin, was the third true knowledge attained by me in the last watch of the night.
an8.11:19.2 | S: Ignorance was banished and knowledge arose; darkness was banished and light arose, as happens for a meditator who is diligent, keen, and resolute. | T: Ignorance was dispelled, true knowledge had arisen; darkness was dispelled, light had arisen, as happens when one dwells heedful, ardent, and resolute.
an8.11:19.3 | S: This was my third breaking out, like a chick breaking out of the eggshell.” | T: This, brahmin, was my third breaking out, like that of the chick breaking out of the eggshell.”
an8.11:20.1 | S: When he said this, the brahmin Verañja said to the Buddha: | T: When this was said, the brahmin of Verañjā said to the Blessed One:
an8.11:20.2 | S: “The worthy Gotama is the eldest! The worthy Gotama is the best! | T: “Master Gotama is the eldest! Master Gotama is the best!
an8.11:20.3 | S: Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! | T: Excellent, Master Gotama! Excellent, Master Gotama!
an8.11:20.4 | S: As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, worthy Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. | T: Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the darkness so those with good eyesight can see forms.
an8.11:20.5 | S: I go for refuge to the worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. | T: I now go for refuge to Master Gotama, to the Dhamma, and to the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
an8.11:20.6 | S: From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” | T: Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”

## an8.120
an8.120:1.1 | S: “For insight into greed, eight things should be developed. | T: “Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, eight things are to be developed.
an8.120:1.2 | S: What eight? | T: What eight?
an8.120:1.3 | S: Having physical form, they see forms … not perceiving form internally, they see forms externally … they’re focused only on beauty … going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite’, they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite space … going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite’, they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite consciousness … going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing at all’, they enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness … going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception … going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception and feeling … | T: (1) One possessing form sees forms. (2) One not percipient of form internally sees forms externally. (3) One is focused only on ‘beautiful.’ (4) With the complete surmounting of perceptions of forms, with the passing away of perceptions of sensory impingement, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, perceiving ‘space is infinite,’ one enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of space. (5) By completely surmounting the base of the infinity of space, perceiving ‘consciousness is infinite,’ one enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of consciousness. (6) By completely surmounting the base of the infinity of consciousness, perceiving ‘there is nothing,’ one enters and dwells in the base of nothingness. (7) By completely surmounting the base of nothingness, one enters and dwells in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception. (8) By completely surmounting the base of neither-perceptionnor-non-perception, one enters and dwells in the cessation of perception and feeling.
an8.120:1.4 | S: For insight into greed, these eight things should be developed.” | T: For direct knowledge of lust, these eight things are to be developed.”

## an8.121-147
an8.121-147:1.1 | S: “For the complete understanding of greed … | T: “Bhikkhus, for full understanding of lust …
an8.121-147:1.2 | S: complete ending … | T: for the utter destruction …
an8.121-147:1.3 | S: giving up … | T: for the abandoning …
an8.121-147:1.4 | S: ending … | T: for the destruction …
an8.121-147:1.5 | S: vanishing … | T: for the vanishing …
an8.121-147:1.6 | S: fading away … | T: for the fading away …
an8.121-147:1.7 | S: cessation … | T: for the cessation …
an8.121-147:1.8 | S: giving away … | T: for the giving up …
an8.121-147:1.9 | S: letting go … | T: for the relinquishment of lust …
an8.121-147:1.10 | S: these eight things should be developed.” | T: these eight things are to be developed.”

