## an4.35
an4.35:1.1 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrel sanctuary.
an4.35:1.2 | S: Then Vassakāra the brahmin, a chief minister of Magadha, went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. | T: Then the brahmin Vassakāra, the chief minister of Magadha, approached the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him.
an4.35:1.3 | S: When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha: | T: When they had concluded their greetings and cordial talk, he sat down to one side and said to the Blessed One:
an4.35:2.1 | S: “Worthy Gotama, when someone has four qualities we describe him as a great man with great wisdom. | T: “Master Gotama, we describe someone who possesses four qualities as a great man with great wisdom.
an4.35:2.2 | S: What four? | T: What four?
an4.35:2.3 | S: They are very learned in diverse fields of learning. | T: (1) Here, someone is highly learned in the various fields of learning.
an4.35:2.4 | S: They understand the meaning of diverse statements, saying: ‘This is what that statement means; that is what this statement means.’ | T: (2) He understands the meaning of various statements, so that he can say: ‘This is the meaning of this statement; this is the meaning of that one.’
an4.35:2.5 | S: They are mindful, able to remember and recollect what was said and done long ago. | T: (3) He has a good memory; he remembers and recollects what was done and said long ago.
an4.35:2.6 | S: They are deft and tireless in household duties, understanding how to go about things in order to complete and organize the work. | T: (4) He is skillful and diligent in attending to the diverse chores of a householder; he possesses sound judgment about them in order to carry out and arrange them properly.
an4.35:2.7 | S: When someone possesses these four qualities we describe him as a great man with great wisdom. | T: We describe someone who possesses these four qualities as a great man with great wisdom.
an4.35:2.8 | S: If the worthy Gotama agrees with me, please say so. | T: If Master Gotama thinks what I say should be approved, let him approve it.
an4.35:2.9 | S: If he disagrees, please say so.” | T: If he thinks what I say should be rejected, let him reject it.”
an4.35:3.1 | S: “Brahmin, I neither agree nor disagree with you, | T: “I neither approve of your statement, brahmin, nor do I reject it.
an4.35:3.2 | S: but when someone has four qualities I describe him as a great man with great wisdom. | T: Rather, I describe one who possesses four other qualities as a great man with great wisdom.
an4.35:3.3 | S: What four? | T: What four?
an4.35:3.4 | S: It’s when someone practices for the welfare and happiness of the people. | T: (1) Here, he is practicing for the welfare and happiness of many people;
an4.35:3.5 | S: They’ve established many people in the noble system, that is, the principles of goodness and skillfulness. | T: he is one who has established many people in the noble method, that is, in the goodness of the Dhamma, in the wholesomeness of the Dhamma.
an4.35:3.6 | S: They think what they want to think, and don’t think what they don’t want to think. | T: (2) He thinks whatever he wants to think and does not think what he does not want to think;
an4.35:3.7 | S: They consider what they want to consider, and don’t consider what they don’t want to consider. | T: he intends whatever he wants to intend and does not intend what he does not want to intend;
an4.35:3.8 | S: Thus they have achieved mental mastery of the paths of thought. | T: thus he has attained to mental mastery over the ways of thought.
an4.35:3.9 | S: They get the four absorptions—blissful meditations in this life that belong to the higher mind—when they want, without trouble or difficulty. | T: (3) He gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life.
an4.35:3.10 | S: They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom. And they live having realized it with their own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements. | T: (4) With the destruction of the taints, he has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
an4.35:3.11 | S: Brahmin, I neither agree nor disagree with you, | T: “I neither approve of your statement, brahmin, nor do I reject it.
an4.35:3.12 | S: but when someone possesses these four qualities I describe him as a great man with great wisdom.” | T: But I describe someone who possesses these four qualities as a great man with great wisdom.”
an4.35:4.1 | S: “It’s incredible, worthy Gotama, it’s amazing! | T: “It is astounding and amazing, Master Gotama,
an4.35:4.2 | S: How well said this was by the worthy Gotama! | T: how well this has been stated by Master Gotama.
an4.35:4.3 | S: And we will remember the worthy Gotama as someone who possesses these four qualities. | T: And we consider Master Gotama as one who possesses these four qualities.
an4.35:4.4 | S: For the worthy Gotama practices for the welfare and happiness of the people … | T: (1) For he is practicing for the welfare and happiness of many people;
an4.35:4.5 | P: bahu te janatā ariye ñāye patiṭṭhāpitā, yadidaṁ kalyāṇadhammatā kusaladhammatā. | T: he is one who has established many people in the noble method, that is, in the goodness of the Dhamma, in the wholesomeness of the Dhamma.
an4.35:4.6 | P: Bhavañhi gotamo yaṁ vitakkaṁ ākaṅkhati vitakketuṁ taṁ vitakkaṁ vitakketi, yaṁ vitakkaṁ nākaṅkhati vitakketuṁ na taṁ vitakkaṁ vitakketi, yaṁ saṅkappaṁ ākaṅkhati saṅkappetuṁ taṁ saṅkappaṁ saṅkappeti, yaṁ saṅkappaṁ nākaṅkhati saṅkappetuṁ na taṁ saṅkappaṁ saṅkappeti. | T: (2) He thinks whatever he wants to think and does not think what he does not want to think; he intends whatever he wants to intend and does not intend what he does not want to intend;
an4.35:4.7 | S: The worthy Gotama has achieved mental mastery of the paths of thought. | T: thus he has attained to mental mastery over the ways of thought.
an4.35:4.8 | S: The worthy Gotama gets the four absorptions … when he wants, without trouble or difficulty. | T: (3) He gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life.
an4.35:4.9 | S: The worthy Gotama has realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom. He lives having realized it with his own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements.” | T: (4) With the destruction of the taints, he has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.”
an4.35:5.1 | S: “Your words are clearly invasive and intrusive, brahmin. | T: “Surely, brahmin, your words are prying and intrusive.
an4.35:5.2 | S: Nevertheless, I will answer you. | T: Nevertheless, I will answer you.
an4.35:5.3 | S: For I do practice for the welfare and happiness of the people … | T: (1) Indeed, I am practicing for the welfare and happiness of many people;
an4.35:5.4 | P: bahu me janatā ariye ñāye patiṭṭhāpitā, yadidaṁ kalyāṇadhammatā kusaladhammatā. | T: I have established many people in the noble method, that is, in the goodness of the Dhamma, in the wholesomeness of the Dhamma.
an4.35:5.5 | P: Ahañhi, brāhmaṇa, yaṁ vitakkaṁ ākaṅkhāmi vitakketuṁ taṁ vitakkaṁ vitakkemi, yaṁ vitakkaṁ nākaṅkhāmi vitakketuṁ na taṁ vitakkaṁ vitakkemi, yaṁ saṅkappaṁ ākaṅkhāmi saṅkappetuṁ taṁ saṅkappaṁ saṅkappemi, yaṁ saṅkappaṁ nākaṅkhāmi saṅkappetuṁ na taṁ saṅkappaṁ saṅkappemi. | T: (2) I think what I want to think and do not think what I do not want to think; I intend what I want to intend and do not intend what I do not want to intend;
an4.35:5.6 | S: I have achieved mental mastery of the paths of thought. | T: thus I have attained to mental mastery over the ways of thought.
an4.35:5.7 | S: I do get the four absorptions … when I want, without trouble or difficulty. | T: (3) I gain at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life.
an4.35:5.8 | S: I have realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom. I live having realized it with my own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements. | T: (4) With the destruction of the taints, I have realized for myself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, I dwell in it.”
an4.35:6.1 | S: He discovered release from the snare of death | T: He who found for the sake of all beings release from the snare of death;
an4.35:6.2 | S: for all beings, | T: (none)
an4.35:6.3 | S: and explained the system of the teaching | T: who revealed the Dhamma, the method,
an4.35:6.4 | S: for the welfare of gods and humans. | T: for the benefit of devas and humans;
an4.35:6.5 | S: When they see him or hear him, | T: (none)
an4.35:6.6 | S: many people become confident. | T: he in whom many people gain confidence when they see and listen to him;
an4.35:7.1 | S: He is skilled in what is the path <j>and what is not the path, | T: the one skilled in the path and what is not the path,
an4.35:7.2 | S: he has completed the task <j>and is free of defilements. | T: the taintless one who accomplished his task;
an4.35:7.3 | S: The Buddha, bearing his final body, | T: the Enlightened One bearing his final body
an4.35:7.4 | S: is called ‘a great man, of great wisdom’.” | T: is called “a great man of great wisdom.”

## sn22.95
sn22.95:1.1 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Ayodhya on the bank of the Ganges River. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Ayojjha on the bank of the river Ganges.
sn22.95:1.2 | S: There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: | T: There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus:
sn22.95:2.1 | S: “Mendicants, suppose this Ganges River was carrying along a big lump of foam. And a person with clear eyes would see it and contemplate it, examining it rationally. And it would appear to them as completely vacuous, hollow, and insubstantial. For what essence could there be in a lump of foam? | T: “Bhikkhus, suppose that this river Ganges was carrying along a great lump of foam. A man with good sight would inspect it, ponder it, and carefully investigate it, and it would appear to him to be void, hollow, insubstantial. For what substance could there be in a lump of foam?
sn22.95:2.2 | S: In the same way, a mendicant sees and contemplates any kind of form at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near—examining it rationally. And it appears to them completely vacuous, hollow, and insubstantial. For what essence could there be in form? | T: So too, bhikkhus, whatever kind of form there is, whether past, future, or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near: a bhikkhu inspects it, ponders it, and carefully investigates it, and it would appear to him to be void, hollow, insubstantial. For what substance could there be in form?
sn22.95:3.1 | S: Suppose it was autumn, when the heavens rain heavily, and a bubble on the water forms and pops right away. And a person with clear eyes would see it and contemplate it, examining it rationally. And it would appear to them as completely vacuous, hollow, and insubstantial. For what essence could there be in a water bubble? | T: “Suppose, bhikkhus, that in the autumn, when it is raining and big rain drops are falling, a water bubble arises and bursts on the surface of the water. A man with good sight would inspect it, ponder it, and carefully investigate it, and it would appear to him to be void, hollow, insubstantial. For what substance could there be in a water bubble?
sn22.95:3.2 | S: In the same way, a mendicant sees and contemplates any kind of feeling at all … examining it rationally. And it appears to them completely vacuous, hollow, and insubstantial. For what essence could there be in feeling? | T: So too, bhikkhus, whatever kind of feeling there is, whether past, future, or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near: a bhikkhu inspects it, ponders it, and carefully investigates it, and it would appear to him to be void, hollow, insubstantial. For what substance could there be in feeling?
sn22.95:4.1 | S: Suppose that in the last month of summer, at noon, a shimmering mirage appears. And a person with clear eyes would see it and contemplate it, examining it rationally. And it would appear to them as completely vacuous, hollow, and insubstantial. For what essence could there be in a mirage? | T: “Suppose, bhikkhus, that in the last month of the hot season, at high noon, a shimmering mirage appears. A man with good sight would inspect it, ponder it, and carefully investigate it, and it would appear to him to be void, hollow, insubstantial. For what substance could there be in a mirage?
sn22.95:4.2 | S: In the same way, a mendicant sees and contemplates any kind of perception at all … examining it carefully. And it appears to them completely vacuous, hollow, and insubstantial. For what substance could there be in perception? | T: So too, bhikkhus, whatever kind of perception there is, whether past, future, or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near: a bhikkhu inspects it, ponders it, and carefully investigates it, and it would appear to him to be void, hollow, insubstantial. For what substance could there be in perception?
sn22.95:5.1 | S: Suppose there was a person in need of heartwood. Wandering in search of heartwood, they’d take a sharp axe and enter a forest. There they’d see a big banana trunk, straight and young and grown unskewed. They’d cut it down at the base, cut off the top, and unroll the coiled sheaths. But they wouldn’t even find sapwood, much less heartwood. And a person with clear eyes would see it and contemplate it, examining it rationally. And it would appear to them as completely vacuous, hollow, and insubstantial. For what essence could there be in a banana trunk? | T: “Suppose, bhikkhus, that a man needing heartwood, seeking heartwood, wandering in search of heartwood, would take a sharp axe and enter a forest. There he would see the trunk of a large plantain tree, straight, fresh, without a fruit-bud core. He would cut it down at the root, cut off the crown, and unroll the coil. As he unrolls the coil, he would not find even softwood, let alone heartwood. A man with good sight would inspect it, ponder it, and carefully investigate it, and it would appear to him to be void, hollow, insubstantial. For what substance could there be in the trunk of a plantain tree?
sn22.95:5.2 | S: In the same way, a mendicant sees and contemplates any kind of choices at all … examining them rationally. And they appear to them as completely vacuous, hollow, and insubstantial. For what essence could there be in choices? | T: So too, bhikkhus, whatever kind of volitional formations there are, whether past, future, or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near: a bhikkhu inspects them, ponders them, and carefully investigates them. As he investigates them, they appear to him to be void, hollow, insubstantial. For what substance could there be in volitional formations?
sn22.95:6.1 | S: Suppose an illusionist or their apprentice was to demonstrate an illusion at the crossroads. And a person with clear eyes would see it and contemplate it, examining it rationally. And it would appear to them as completely vacuous, hollow, and insubstantial. For what essence could there be in an illusion? | T: “Suppose, bhikkhus, that a magician or a magician’s apprentice would display a magical illusion at a crossroads. A man with good sight would inspect it, ponder it, and carefully investigate it, and it would appear to him to be void, hollow, insubstantial. For what substance could there be in a magical illusion?
sn22.95:6.2 | S: In the same way, a mendicant sees and contemplates any kind of consciousness at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near—examining it rationally. And it appears to them completely vacuous, hollow, and insubstantial. For what essence could there be in consciousness? | T: So too, bhikkhus, whatever kind of consciousness there is, whether past, future, or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near: a bhikkhu inspects it, ponders it, and carefully investigates it, and it would appear to him to be void, hollow, insubstantial. For what substance could there be in consciousness?
sn22.95:7.1 | S: Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. | T: “Seeing thus, bhikkhus, the instructed noble disciple experiences revulsion towards form, revulsion towards feeling, revulsion towards perception, revulsion towards volitional formations, revulsion towards consciousness.
sn22.95:7.2 | S: Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When they’re freed, they know they’re freed. | T: Experiencing revulsion, he becomes dispassionate. Through dispassion his mind is liberated. When it is liberated there comes the knowledge: ‘It’s liberated.’
sn22.95:7.3 | S: They understand: ‘… there is nothing further for this place.’” | T: He understands: ‘Destroyed is birth, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more for this state of being.’”
sn22.95:8.1 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: This is what the Blessed One said.
sn22.95:8.2 | S: Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: | T: Having said this, the Fortunate One, the Teacher, further said this:
sn22.95:9.1 | S: “Form is like a lump of foam; | T: “Form is like a lump of foam,
sn22.95:9.2 | S: feeling is like a bubble; | T: Feeling like a water bubble;
sn22.95:9.3 | S: perception seems like a mirage; | T: Perception is like a mirage,
sn22.95:9.4 | S: choices like a banana plant; | T: Volitions like a plantain trunk,
sn22.95:9.5 | S: and consciousness like an illusion: | T: And consciousness like an illusion,
sn22.95:9.6 | S: so taught the Kinsman of the Sun. | T: So explained the Kinsman of the Sun.
sn22.95:10.1 | S: However you contemplate them, | T: “However one may ponder it
sn22.95:10.2 | S: examining them rationally, | T: And carefully investigate it,
sn22.95:10.3 | S: they’re vacuous and hollow | T: It appears but hollow and void
sn22.95:10.4 | S: when you look at them closely. | T: When one views it carefully.
sn22.95:11.1 | S: Concerning this body, | T: “With reference to this body
sn22.95:11.2 | S: he of vast wisdom has taught | T: The One of Broad Wisdom has taught
sn22.95:11.3 | S: that when three things are given up, | T: That with the abandoning of three things
sn22.95:11.4 | S: you’ll see this form discarded. | T: One sees this form discarded.
sn22.95:12.1 | S: When vitality, warmth, and consciousness | T: “When vitality, heat, and consciousness
sn22.95:12.2 | S: leave this body, | T: Depart from this physical body,
sn22.95:12.3 | S: it lies dumped there, | T: Then it lies there cast away:
sn22.95:12.4 | S: food for others, insentient. | T: Food for others, without volition.
sn22.95:13.1 | S: Such is this continuity, | T: “Such is this continuum,
sn22.95:13.2 | S: this illusion, this lament of fools. | T: This illusion, beguiler of fools.
sn22.95:13.3 | S: It’s said to be a killer, | T: It is taught to be a murderer;
sn22.95:13.4 | S: for no core is found here. | T: Here no substance can be found.
sn22.95:14.1 | S: An energetic mendicant | T: (none)
sn22.95:14.2 | S: should examine the aggregates like this, | T: “A bhikkhu with energy aroused Should look upon the aggregates thus,
sn22.95:14.3 | S: with situational awareness and mindfulness | T: (none)
sn22.95:14.4 | S: whether by day or by night. | T: Whether by day or at night, Comprehending, ever mindful.
sn22.95:15.1 | S: They should give up all fetters, | T: “He should discard all the fetters
sn22.95:15.2 | S: and make a refuge for themselves. | T: And make a refuge for himself;
sn22.95:15.3 | S: They should live as though their head was on fire, | T: Let him fare as with head ablaze,
sn22.95:15.4 | S: aspiring to the state that does not pass.” | T: Yearning for the imperishable state.”

## an3.39
an3.39:1.1 | S: “My lifestyle was delicate, mendicants, most delicate, extremely delicate. | T: “Bhikkhus, I was delicately nurtured, most delicately nurtured, extremely delicately nurtured.
an3.39:1.2 | S: In my father’s home, lotus ponds were made just for me. | T: At my father’s residence lotus ponds were made just for my enjoyment:
an3.39:1.3 | S: In some, blue water lilies blossomed, while in others, there were pink or white lotuses, just for my benefit. | T: in one of them blue lotuses bloomed, in another red lotuses, and in a third white lotuses.
an3.39:1.4 | S: I only used sandalwood from Kāsi, and my turbans, jackets, sarongs, and upper robes also came from Kāsi. | T: I used no sandalwood unless it came from Kāsi and my headdress, jacket, lower garment, and upper garment were made of cloth from Kāsi.
an3.39:1.5 | S: And a white parasol was held over me night and day, with the thought: | T: By day and by night a white canopy was held over me so that cold and heat,
an3.39:1.6 | S: ‘Don’t let cold, heat, grass, dust, or damp bother him.’ | T: dust, grass, and dew would not settle on me.
an3.39:2.1 | S: I had three stilt longhouses—one for the winter, one for the summer, and one for the rainy season. | T: “I had three mansions: one for the winter, one for the summer, and one for the rainy season.
an3.39:2.2 | S: I stayed in a stilt longhouse without coming downstairs for the four months of the rainy season, where I was entertained by musicians—none of them men. | T: I spent the four months of the rains in the rainy-season mansion, being entertained by musicians, none of whom were male, and I did not leave the mansion.
an3.39:2.3 | S: While the bondservants, workers, and staff in other houses are given sour gruel with false black pepper to eat, in my father’s home they are given fine rice with meat. | T: While in other people’s homes slaves, workers, and servants are given broken rice together with sour gruel for their meals, in my father’s residence they were given choice hill rice, meat, and boiled rice.
an3.39:3.1 | S: Amid such prosperity and such a delicate lifestyle, I thought: | T: (1) “Amid such splendor and a delicate life, it occurred to me:
an3.39:3.2 | S: ‘When an unlearned ordinary person—who is liable to grow old, not being exempt from old age—sees someone else who is old, they’re horrified, repelled, and disgusted, overlooking the fact that they themselves are in the same situation. | T: ‘An uninstructed worldling, though himself subject to old age, not exempt from old age, feels repelled, humiliated, and disgusted when he sees another who is old, overlooking his own situation.
an3.39:3.3 | S: But since I, too, am liable to grow old, it would not be appropriate for me to be horrified, embarrassed, and disgusted, when I see someone else who is old.’ | T: Now I too am subject to old age and am not exempt from old age. Such being the case, if I were to feel repelled, humiliated, and disgusted when seeing another who is old, that would not be proper for me.’
an3.39:3.4 | S: Reflecting like this, I entirely gave up the vanity of youth. | T: When I reflected thus, my intoxication with youth was completely abandoned.
an3.39:4.1 | S: ‘When an unlearned ordinary person—who is liable to get sick, not being exempt from sickness—sees someone else who is sick, they’re horrified, repelled, and disgusted, overlooking the fact that they themselves are in the same situation. | T: (2) “Again, it occurred to me: ‘An uninstructed worldling, though himself subject to illness, not exempt from illness, feels repelled, humiliated, and disgusted when he sees another who is ill, overlooking his own situation.
an3.39:4.2 | S: But since I, too, am liable to get sick, it would not be appropriate for me to be horrified, embarrassed, and disgusted, when I see someone else who is sick.’ | T: Now I too am subject to illness and am not exempt from illness. Such being the case, if I were to feel repelled, humiliated, and disgusted when seeing another who is ill, that would not be proper for me.’
an3.39:4.3 | S: Reflecting like this, I entirely gave up the vanity of health. | T: When I reflected thus, my intoxication with health was completely abandoned.
an3.39:5.1 | S: ‘When an unlearned ordinary person—who is liable to die, not being exempt from death—sees someone else who is dead, they’re horrified, repelled, and disgusted, overlooking the fact that they themselves are in the same situation. | T: (3) “Again, it occurred to me: ‘An uninstructed worldling, though himself subject to death, not exempt from death, feels repelled, humiliated, and disgusted when he sees another who has died, overlooking his own situation.
an3.39:5.2 | S: But since I, too, am liable to die, it would not be appropriate for me to be horrified, embarrassed, and disgusted, when I see someone else who is dead.’ | T: Now I too am subject to death and am not exempt from death. Such being the case, if I were to feel repelled, humiliated, and disgusted when seeing another who has died, that would not be proper for me.’
an3.39:5.3 | S: Reflecting like this, I entirely gave up the vanity of life. | T: When I reflected thus, my intoxication with life was completely abandoned.
an3.39:6.1 | S: There are these three vanities. | T: “There are, bhikkhus, these three kinds of intoxication.
an3.39:6.2 | S: What three? | T: What three?
an3.39:6.3 | S: The vanity of youth, of health, and of life. | T: Intoxication with youth, intoxication with health, and intoxication with life.
an3.39:6.4 | S: Intoxicated with the vanity of youth, an unlearned ordinary person does bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: (1) An uninstructed worldling, intoxicated with youth, engages in misconduct by body, speech, and mind.
an3.39:6.5 | S: When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: With the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
an3.39:6.6 | S: Intoxicated with the vanity of health … | T: (2) An uninstructed worldling, intoxicated with health, engages in misconduct by body, speech, and mind. With the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
an3.39:6.7 | S: Intoxicated with the vanity of life, an unlearned ordinary person does bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: (3) An uninstructed worldling, intoxicated with life, engages in misconduct by body, speech, and mind.
an3.39:6.8 | S: When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: With the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
an3.39:7.1 | S: Intoxicated with the vanity of youth, health, or life, a mendicant resigns the training and returns to a lesser life. | T: “Intoxicated with youth, a bhikkhu gives up the training and reverts to the lower life; or intoxicated with health, he gives up the training and reverts to the lower life; or intoxicated with life, he gives up the training and reverts to the lower life.
an3.39:8.1 | S: For others, sickness is natural, | T: “Worldlings subject to illness,
an3.39:8.2 | S: and so are old age and death. | T: old age, and death,
an3.39:8.3 | S: Though this is how their nature is, | T: (none)
an3.39:8.4 | S: ordinary people feel disgusted. | T: are disgusted by other people who exist in accordance with their nature.
an3.39:9.1 | S: If I were to be disgusted | T: “If I were to become disgusted
an3.39:9.2 | S: with creatures whose nature is such, | T: with beings who have such a nature,
an3.39:9.3 | S: it would not be appropriate for me, | T: that would not be proper for me
an3.39:9.4 | S: since my life is just the same. | T: since I too have the same nature.
an3.39:10.1 | S: Living in such a way, | T: “While I was dwelling thus,
an3.39:10.2 | S: I understood the truth without attachments. | T: having known the state without acquisitions,
an3.39:10.3 | S: I mastered all vanities— | T: I overcame all intoxications—
an3.39:10.4 | S: of health, of youth, | T: intoxication with health, with youth,
an3.39:11.1 | S: and even of life— | T: and with life—
an3.39:11.2 | S: seeing renunciation as sanctuary. | T: having seen security in renunciation.
an3.39:11.3 | S: Zeal sprang up in me | T: “Zeal then arose in me
an3.39:11.4 | S: as I looked to extinguishment. | T: as I clearly saw nibbāna.
an3.39:12.1 | S: Now I’m unable | T: Now I am incapable
an3.39:12.2 | S: to indulge in sensual pleasures; | T: of indulging in sensual pleasures.
an3.39:12.3 | S: there’s no turning back, | T: Relying on the spiritual life, never will I turn back.”
an3.39:12.4 | S: I’m committed to the spiritual life.” | T: (none)

## mn52
mn52:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
mn52:1.2 | S: At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near Vesālī in the little village of Beluva. | T: On one occasion the Venerable Ānanda was living at Beluvagāmaka near Vesālī.
mn52:1.3 | S: Now at that time the householder Dasama, a wealthy citizen, had arrived at Pāṭaliputta on some business. | T: Now on that occasion the householder Dasama of Aṭṭhakanāgara had arrived at Pāṭaliputta for some business or other.
mn52:2.1 | S: He went to the Chicken Monastery, approached a certain mendicant, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, | T: Then he went to a certain bhikkhu in Kukkuṭa’s Park, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and asked him:
mn52:2.2 | S: “Sir, where is Venerable Ānanda now staying? | T: “Where does the venerable Ānanda live now, venerable sir?
mn52:2.3 | S: For I want to see him.” | T: I wish to see the venerable Ānanda.”
mn52:2.4 | S: “Householder, Venerable Ānanda is staying near Vesālī in the little village of Beluva.” | T: “The venerable Ānanda is living at Beluvagāmaka near Vesālī, householder.”
mn52:3.1 | S: Then the householder Dasama, having concluded his business there, went to the little village of Beluva in Vesālī to see Ānanda. He bowed, sat down to one side, and said to Ānanda: | T: When the householder Dasama had completed his business at Pāṭaliputta, he went to the venerable Ānanda at Beluvagāmaka near Vesālī. After paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and asked him:
mn52:3.2 | S: “Honorable Ānanda, is there one thing that has been rightly explained by the Blessed One—who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha—practicing which a diligent, keen, and resolute mendicant’s mind is freed, their defilements are ended, and they arrive at the supreme sanctuary from the yoke?” | T: “Venerable Ānanda, has any one thing been proclaimed by the Blessed One who knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened, wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute, his unliberated mind comes to be liberated, his undestroyed taints come to be destroyed, and he attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not attained before?”
mn52:3.3 | S: “There is, householder.” | T: “There is, householder, indeed one such thing proclaimed by the Blessed One.”
mn52:3.4 | S: “And what is that one thing?” | T: “What is that one thing, venerable Ānanda?”
mn52:4.1 | S: “Householder, it’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: “Here, householder, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
mn52:4.2 | S: Then they reflect: | T: He considers this and understands it thus:
mn52:4.3 | S: ‘Even this first absorption is produced by choices and intentions.’ | T: ‘This first jhāna is conditioned and volitionally produced.
mn52:4.4 | S: They understand: ‘But whatever is produced by choices and intentions is impermanent and liable to cessation.’ | T: But whatever is conditioned and volitionally produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.’
mn52:4.5 | S: Abiding in that they attain the ending of defilements. | T: If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints.
mn52:4.6 | S: If they don’t attain the ending of defilements, with the ending of the five lower fetters they’re reborn spontaneously, because of their passion and love for that meditation. They are extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. | T: But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints because of that desire for the Dhamma, that delight in the Dhamma, then with the destruction of the five lower fetters he becomes one due to reappear spontaneously in the Pure Abodes and there attain final Nibbāna without ever returning from that world.
mn52:4.7 | S: This is one thing that has been rightly explained by the Blessed One—who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha—practicing which a diligent, keen, and resolute mendicant’s mind is freed, their defilements are ended, and they arrive at the supreme sanctuary from the yoke. | T: “This is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One who knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened, wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute, his unliberated mind comes to be liberated, his undestroyed taints come to be destroyed, and he attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not attained before.
mn52:5.1 | S: Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption … | T: “Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, a bhikkhu enters and abides in the second jhāna…He considers this and understands it thus: ‘This second jhāna is conditioned and volitionally produced. But whatever is conditioned and volitionally produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.’ If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints. But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints…without ever returning from that world. “This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One … wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute…he attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not attained before.
mn52:6.1 | S: third absorption … | T: “Again, with the fading away as well of rapture, a bhikkhu…enters upon and abides in the third jhāna…He considers this and understands it thus: ‘This third jhāna is conditioned and volitionally produced. But whatever is conditioned and volitionally produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.’ If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints. But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints…without ever returning from that world. “This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One… wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute…he attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not attained before.
mn52:7.1 | S: fourth absorption … | T: “Again, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain…a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna…He considers this and understands it thus: ‘This fourth jhāna is conditioned and volitionally produced. But whatever is conditioned and volitionally produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.’ If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints. But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints…without ever returning from that world. “This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One… wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute…he attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not attained before.
mn52:8.1 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant meditates spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of love to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. | T: “Again, a bhikkhu abides pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, likewise the second, likewise the third, likewise the fourth; so above, below, around, and everywhere, and to all as to himself, he abides pervading the all-encompassing world with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility and without ill will. He considers this and understands it thus: ‘This deliverance of mind through loving-kindness is conditioned and volitionally produced. But whatever is conditioned and volitionally produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.’ If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints. But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints…without ever returning from that world. “This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One… wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute…he attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not attained before. “Again, a bhikkhu abides pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with compassion…without ill will. He considers this and understands it thus: ‘This deliverance of mind through compassion is conditioned and volitionally produced. But whatever is conditioned and volitionally produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.’ If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints. But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints…without ever returning from that world. “This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One… wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute…he attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not attained before. “Again, a bhikkhu abides pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with altruistic joy…without ill will.
mn52:8.2 | S: Then they reflect: | T: He considers this and understands it thus:
mn52:8.3 | S: ‘Even this heart’s release by love is produced by choices and intentions.’ | T: ‘This deliverance of mind through altruistic joy is conditioned and volitionally produced.
mn52:8.4 | S: They understand: ‘But whatever is produced by choices and intentions is impermanent and liable to cessation.’ … | T: But whatever is conditioned and volitionally produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.’ If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints. But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints…without ever returning from that world.
mn52:8.5 | P: So tattha ṭhito …pe… | T: “This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One… wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent,
mn52:8.6 | P: anuttaraṁ yogakkhemaṁ anupāpuṇāti. | T: and resolute…he attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not attained before.
mn52:9.1 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant meditates spreading a heart full of compassion … | T: “Again, a bhikkhu abides pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with equanimity…without ill will.
mn52:10.1 | S: rejoicing … | T: (none)
mn52:11.1 | S: equanimity … | T: (none)
mn52:11.2 | P: So iti paṭisañcikkhati: | T: He considers this and understands it thus:
mn52:11.3 | P: ‘ayampi kho upekkhācetovimutti abhisaṅkhatā abhisañcetayitā. | T: ‘This deliverance of mind through equanimity is conditioned and volitionally produced.
mn52:11.4 | P: Yaṁ kho pana kiñci abhisaṅkhataṁ abhisañcetayitaṁ tadaniccaṁ nirodhadhamman’ti pajānāti. | T: But whatever is conditioned and volitionally produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.’
mn52:11.5 | P: So tattha ṭhito …pe… | T: If he is steady in that,
mn52:11.6 | P: anuttaraṁ yogakkhemaṁ anupāpuṇāti. | T: he attains the destruction of the taints. But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints…without ever returning from that world. “This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One… wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute…he attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not attained before.
mn52:12.1 | S: Furthermore, householder, a mendicant, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite’, enters and remains in the dimension of infinite space. | T: “Again, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of sensory impact, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infinite space.
mn52:12.2 | S: Then they reflect: | T: He considers this and understands it thus:
mn52:12.3 | S: ‘Even this attainment of the dimension of infinite space is produced by choices and intentions.’ | T: ‘This attainment of the base of infinite space is conditioned and volitionally produced.
mn52:12.4 | S: They understand: ‘But whatever is produced by choices and intentions is impermanent and liable to cessation.’ … | T: But whatever is conditioned and volitionally produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.’
mn52:12.5 | P: So tattha ṭhito …pe… | T: If he is steady in that,
mn52:12.6 | P: anuttaraṁ yogakkhemaṁ anupāpuṇāti. | T: he attains the destruction of the taints. But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints…without ever returning from that world. “This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One … wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute…he attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not attained before.
mn52:13.1 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite’, enters and remains in the dimension of infinite consciousness. … | T: “Again, by completely surmounting the base of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infinite consciousness. He considers this and understands it thus: ‘This attainment of the base of infinite consciousness is conditioned and volitionally produced.
mn52:13.4 | P: Yaṁ kho pana kiñci abhisaṅkhataṁ abhisañcetayitaṁ tadaniccaṁ nirodhadhamman’ti pajānāti. | T: But whatever is conditioned and volitionally produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.’
mn52:13.5 | P: So tattha ṭhito …pe… | T: If he is steady in that,
mn52:13.6 | P: anuttaraṁ yogakkhemaṁ anupāpuṇāti. | T: he attains the destruction of the taints. But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints…without ever returning from that world. “This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One… wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute…he attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not attained before.
mn52:14.1 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing at all’, enters and remains in the dimension of nothingness. | T: “Again, by completely surmounting the base of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing,’ a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of nothingness.
mn52:14.2 | S: Then they reflect: | T: He considers this and understands it thus:
mn52:14.3 | S: ‘Even this attainment of the dimension of nothingness is produced by choices and intentions.’ | T: ‘This attainment of the base of nothingness is conditioned and volitionally produced.
mn52:14.4 | S: They understand: ‘But whatever is produced by choices and intentions is impermanent and liable to cessation.’ | T: But whatever is conditioned and volitionally produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.’
mn52:14.5 | S: Abiding in that they attain the ending of defilements. | T: If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints.
mn52:14.6 | S: If they don’t attain the ending of defilements, with the ending of the five lower fetters they’re reborn spontaneously because of their passion and love for that meditation. They are extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. | T: But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints because of that desire for the Dhamma, that delight in the Dhamma, then with the destruction of the five lower fetters he becomes one due to reappear spontaneously in the Pure Abodes and there attain final Nibbāna without ever returning from that world.
mn52:14.7 | S: This too is one thing that has been rightly explained by the Blessed One—who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha—practicing which a diligent, keen, and resolute mendicant’s mind is freed, their defilements are ended, and they arrive at the supreme sanctuary from the yoke.” | T: “This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One who knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened, wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute, his unliberated mind comes to be liberated, his undestroyed taints come to be destroyed, and he attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not attained before.”
mn52:15.1 | S: When he said this, the householder Dasama said to Venerable Ānanda, | T: When venerable Ānanda had spoken, the householder Dasama of Aṭṭhakanāgara said to him:
mn52:15.2 | S: “Honorable Ānanda, suppose a person was looking for the entrance to a treasure trove. And all at once they’d come across eleven entrances! | T: “Venerable Ānanda, just as if a man seeking one entrance to a hidden treasure came all at once upon eleven entrances to a hidden treasure,
mn52:15.3 | S: In the same way, I was searching for the door to freedom from death. And all at once I found eleven doors to freedom from death for cultivation. | T: so too, while I was seeking one door to the Deathless, I have come all at once to hear of eleven doors to the Deathless.
mn52:15.4 | S: Suppose a person had a house with eleven doors. If the house caught fire they’d be able to flee to safety through any one of those doors. | T: Just as if a man had a house with eleven doors and when that house caught on fire, he could flee to safety by any one of these eleven doors,
mn52:15.5 | S: In the same way, I’m able to flee to safety through any one of these eleven doors to freedom from death. | T: so I can flee to safety by any one of these eleven doors to the Deathless.
mn52:15.6 | S: Sir, those of other religions seek a fee for the tutor. Why shouldn’t I make an offering to Venerable Ānanda?” | T: Venerable sir, these sectarians will even seek a teacher’s fee for their teacher; why shouldn’t I make an offering to the venerable Ānanda?”
mn52:16.1 | S: Then the householder Dasama, having assembled the Saṅgha from Vesālī and Pāṭaliputta, served and satisfied them with his own hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods. | T: Then the householder Dasama of Aṭṭhakanāgara assembled the Sangha of bhikkhus from Pāṭaliputta and Vesālī, and with his own hands he served and satisfied them with various kinds of good food.
mn52:16.2 | S: He clothed each and every mendicant in a pair of garments, with a set of three robes for Ānanda. And he had a dwelling worth five hundred built for Ānanda. | T: He presented a pair of cloths to each bhikkhu, and he presented a triple robe to the venerable Ānanda, and he had a dwelling worth five hundred built for the venerable Ānanda.

## sn16.13
sn16.13:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
sn16.13:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anathapiṇḍika’s Park.
sn16.13:1.3 | S: Then Venerable Mahākassapa went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: | T: Then the Venerable Mahakassapa approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and said to him:
sn16.13:1.4 | S: “What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why there used to be fewer training rules but more enlightened mendicants? | T: “Venerable sir, what is the reason, what is the cause, why formerly there were fewer training rules but more bhikkhus were established in final knowledge,
sn16.13:1.5 | S: And what is the cause, what is the reason why these days there are more training rules and fewer enlightened mendicants?” | T: while now there are more training rules but fewer bhikkhus are established in final knowledge?”
sn16.13:1.6 | S: “That’s how it is, Kassapa. When sentient beings are in decline and the true teaching is disappearing there are more training rules and fewer enlightened mendicants. | T: “That’s the way it is, Kassapa. When beings are deteriorating and the true Dhamma is disappearing there are more training rules but fewer bhikkhus are established in final knowledge.
sn16.13:1.7 | S: The true teaching doesn’t disappear as long as the counterfeit of the true teaching hasn’t appeared in the world. | T: Kassapa, the true Dhamma does not disappear so long as a counterfeit of the true Dhamma has not arisen in the world.
sn16.13:1.8 | S: But when the counterfeit of the true teaching appears in the world then the true teaching disappears. | T: But when a counterfeit of the true Dhamma arises in the world, then the true Dhamma disappears.
sn16.13:2.1 | S: It’s like native gold, which doesn’t disappear as long as counterfeit gold hasn’t appeared in the world. | T: “Just as, Kassapa, gold does not disappear so long as counterfeit gold has not arisen in the world,
sn16.13:2.2 | S: But when counterfeit gold appears in the world then native gold disappears. | T: but when counterfeit gold arises then true gold disappears,
sn16.13:2.3 | S: In the same way, the true teaching doesn’t disappear as long as the counterfeit of the true teaching hasn’t appeared in the world. | T: so the true Dhamma does not disappear so long as a counterfeit of the true Dhamma has not arisen in the world,
sn16.13:2.4 | S: But when the counterfeit of the true teaching appears in the world then the true teaching disappears. | T: but when a counterfeit of the true Dhamma arises in the world, then the true Dhamma disappears.
sn16.13:3.1 | S: It’s not the elements of earth, water, fire, or air that make the true teaching disappear. | T: “It is not the earth element, Kassapa, that causes the true Dhamma to disappear, nor the water element, nor the heat element, nor the air element.
sn16.13:3.2 | S: Rather, it’s the futile people who appear right here that make the true teaching disappear. | T: It is the senseless people who arise right here who cause the true Dhamma to disappear.
sn16.13:3.3 | S: The true teaching doesn’t disappear like a ship that sinks all at once. | T: “The true Dhamma does not disappear all at once in the way a ship sinks.
sn16.13:4.1 | S: There are five detrimental things that lead to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching. | T: There are, Kassapa, five detrimental things that lead to the decay and disappearance of the true Dhamma.
sn16.13:4.2 | S: What five? | T: What are the five?
sn16.13:4.3 | S: It’s when the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen lack respect and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the training, and immersion. | T: Here the bhikkhus, the bhikkhunīs, the male lay followers, and the female lay followers dwell without reverence and deference towards the Teacher; they dwell without reverence and deference towards the Dhamma; they dwell without reverence and deference towards the Saṅgha; they dwell without reverence and deference towards the training; they dwell without reverence and deference towards concentration.
sn16.13:4.4 | S: These five detrimental things lead to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching. | T: These, Kassapa, are the five detrimental things that lead to the decay and disappearance of the true Dhamma.
sn16.13:5.1 | S: There are five things that lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching. | T: “There are five things, Kassapa, that lead to the longevity of the true Dhamma, to its nondecay and nondisappearance.
sn16.13:5.2 | S: What five? | T: What are the five?
sn16.13:5.3 | S: It’s when the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen maintain respect and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the training, and immersion. | T: Here the bhikkhus, the bhikkhunīs, the male lay followers, and the female lay followers dwell with reverence and deference towards the Teacher; they dwell with reverence and deference towards the Dhamma; they dwell with reverence and deference towards the Saṅgha; they dwell with reverence and deference towards the training; they dwell with reverence and deference towards concentration.
sn16.13:5.4 | S: These five things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching.” | T: These, Kassapa, are the five things that lead to the longevity of the true Dhamma, to its nondecay and nondisappearance.”
sn16.13:6.7 | S: The Linked Discourses with Kassapa are complete. | T: (none)

