## sn36.11
sn36.11:1.1 | S: Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: | T: Then a certain bhikkhu approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and said to him:
sn36.11:1.2 | S: “Just now, sir, as I was in private retreat this thought came to mind. | T: “Here, venerable sir, while I was alone in seclusion, a reflection arose in my mind thus:
sn36.11:1.3 | S: The Buddha has spoken of three feelings. | T: ‘Three feeling have been spoken of by the Blessed One:
sn36.11:1.4 | S: Pleasant, painful, and neutral feeling. | T: pleasant feeling, painful feeling, neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling.
sn36.11:1.5 | S: These are the three feelings the Buddha has spoken of. | T: These three feelings have been spoken of by the Blessed One.
sn36.11:1.6 | S: But the Buddha has also said: | T: But the Blessed One has said:
sn36.11:1.7 | S: ‘Suffering includes whatever is felt.’ | T: “Whatever is felt is included in suffering.”
sn36.11:1.8 | S: What was the Buddha referring to when he said this?” | T: Now with reference to what was this stated by the Blessed One?’”
sn36.11:1.9 | P: ‘yaṁ kiñci vedayitaṁ taṁ dukkhasmin’”ti? | T: (none)
sn36.11:2.1 | S: “Good, good, mendicant! | T: “Good, good, bhikkhu!
sn36.11:2.2 | S: I have spoken of these three feelings. | T: These three feelings have been spoken of by me:
sn36.11:2.3 | S: Pleasant, painful, and neutral feeling. | T: pleasant feeling, painful feeling, neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling.
sn36.11:2.4 | S: These are the three feelings I have spoken of. | T: These three feelings have been spoken of by me.
sn36.11:2.5 | S: But I have also said: | T: And I have also said:
sn36.11:2.6 | S: ‘Suffering includes whatever is felt.’ | T: ‘Whatever is felt is included in suffering.’
sn36.11:2.7 | S: When I said this I was referring to the impermanence of conditions, to the fact that conditions are | T: That has been stated by me with reference to the impermanence of formations.
sn36.11:2.8 | P: ‘yaṁ kiñci vedayitaṁ taṁ dukkhasmin’ti. | T: (none)
sn36.11:2.9 | S: liable to end, | T: That has been stated by me with reference to formations being subject to destruction …
sn36.11:2.10 | S: vanish, | T: to formations being subject to vanishing …
sn36.11:2.11 | S: fade away, | T: to formations being subject to fading away …
sn36.11:2.12 | S: cease, | T: to formations being subject to cessation …
sn36.11:2.13 | S: and perish. | T: to formations being subject to change.
sn36.11:2.14 | P: ‘yaṁ kiñci vedayitaṁ taṁ dukkhasmin’ti. | T: (none)
sn36.11:2.15 | S: But I have also explained the progressive cessation of activities. | T: “Then, bhikkhu, I have also taught the successive cessation of formations.
sn36.11:2.16 | S: For someone who has attained the first absorption, speech has ceased. | T: For one who has attained the first jhana, speech has ceased.
sn36.11:2.17 | S: For someone who has attained the second absorption, the placing of the mind and keeping it connected have ceased. | T: For one who has attained the second jhana, thought and examination have ceased.
sn36.11:2.18 | S: For someone who has attained the third absorption, rapture has ceased. | T: For one who has attained the third jhana, rapture has ceased.
sn36.11:2.19 | S: For someone who has attained the fourth absorption, breathing has ceased. | T: For one who has attained the fourth jhana, in-breathing and out-breathing have ceased.
sn36.11:2.20 | S: For someone who has attained the dimension of infinite space, the perception of form has ceased. | T: For one who has attained the base of the infinity of space, the perception of form has ceased.
sn36.11:2.21 | S: For someone who has attained the dimension of infinite consciousness, the perception of the dimension of infinite space has ceased. | T: For one who has attained the base of the infinity of consciousness, the perception pertaining to the base of the infinity of space has ceased.
sn36.11:2.22 | S: For someone who has attained the dimension of nothingness, the perception of the dimension of infinite consciousness has ceased. | T: For one who has attained the base of nothingness, the perception pertaining to the base of the infinity of consciousness has ceased.
sn36.11:2.23 | S: For someone who has attained the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, the perception of the dimension of nothingness has ceased. | T: For one who has attained the base of neither-perception-nor-nonperception, the perception pertaining to the base of nothingness has ceased.
sn36.11:2.24 | S: For someone who has attained the cessation of perception and feeling, perception and feeling have ceased. | T: For one who has attained the cessation of perception and feeling, perception and feeling have ceased.
sn36.11:2.25 | S: For a mendicant who has ended the defilements, greed, hate, and delusion have ceased. | T: For a bhikkhu whose taints are destroyed, lust has ceased, hatred has ceased, delusion has ceased.
sn36.11:2.26 | S: And I have also explained the progressive settling of activities. | T: “Then, bhikkhu, I have also taught the successive subsiding of formations.
sn36.11:2.27 | S: For someone who has attained the first absorption, speech has stilled. | T: For one who has attained the first jhana speech has subsided….
sn36.11:2.28 | S: For someone who has attained the second absorption, the placing of the mind and keeping it connected have stilled. … | T: (none)
sn36.11:2.29 | S: For someone who has attained the cessation of perception and feeling, perception and feeling have stilled. | T: For one who has attained the cessation of perception and feeling, perception and feeling have subsided.
sn36.11:2.30 | S: For a mendicant who has ended the defilements, greed, hate, and delusion have stilled. | T: For a bhikkhu whose taints are destroyed, lust has subsided, hatred has subsided, delusion has subsided.
sn36.11:2.31 | S: There are these six levels of tranquility. | T: “There are, bhikkhu, these six kinds of tranquillization.
sn36.11:2.32 | S: For someone who has attained the first absorption, speech has been tranquilized. | T: For one who has attained the first jhana, speech has been tranquillized.
sn36.11:2.33 | S: For someone who has attained the second absorption, the placing of the mind and keeping it connected have been tranquilized. | T: For one who has attained the second jhana, thought and examination have been tranquillized.
sn36.11:2.34 | S: For someone who has attained the third absorption, rapture has been tranquilized. | T: For one who has attained the third jhana, rapture has been tranquillized.
sn36.11:2.35 | S: For someone who has attained the fourth absorption, breathing has been tranquilized. | T: For one who has attained the fourth jhana, in-breathing and out-breathing have been tranquillized.
sn36.11:2.36 | S: For someone who has attained the cessation of perception and feeling, perception and feeling have been tranquilized. | T: For one who has attained the cessation of perception and feeling, perception and feeling have been tranquillized.
sn36.11:2.37 | S: For a mendicant who has ended the defilements, greed, hate, and delusion have been tranquilized.” | T: For a bhikkhu whose taints are destroyed, lust has been tranquillized, hatred has been tranquillized, delusion has been tranquillized.”
sn36.11:2.38 | P: Paṭhamaṁ. | T: (none)

## an10.15
an10.15:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha, is said to be the best of all sentient beings—be they footless, with two feet, four feet, or many feet; with form or formless; with perception or without perception or with neither perception nor non-perception. | T: (1) “Bhikkhus, to whatever extent there are beings, whether footless or with two feet, four feet, or many feet, whether having form or formless, whether percipient or non-percipient, or neither percipient nor non-percipient, the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One is declared foremost among them.
an10.15:1.2 | S: In the same way, all skillful qualities are rooted in diligence and meet at diligence, and diligence is said to be the best of them. | T: So too, all wholesome qualities are rooted in heedfulness and converge upon heedfulness and heedfulness is declared foremost among them.
an10.15:2.1 | S: The footprints of all creatures that walk can fit inside an elephant’s footprint, so an elephant’s footprint is said to be the biggest of them all. | T: (2) “Just as the footprints of all animals that roam on land fit into the footprint of the elephant, and the elephant’s footprint is declared foremost among them, that is, with respect to size,
an10.15:2.2 | S: In the same way, all skillful qualities are rooted in diligence and meet at diligence, and diligence is said to be the best of them. | T: so too, all wholesome qualities are rooted in heedfulness and converge upon heedfulness and heedfulness is declared foremost among them.
an10.15:3.1 | S: The rafters of a bungalow all lean to the peak, slope to the peak, and meet at the peak, so the peak is said to be the topmost of them all. | T: (3) “Just as all the rafters of a peaked house lean toward the roof peak, slope toward the roof peak, converge upon the roof peak, and the roof peak is declared foremost among them,
an10.15:3.2 | S: In the same way, all skillful qualities are rooted in diligence and meet at diligence, and diligence is said to be the best of them. | T: so too, all wholesome qualities are rooted in heedfulness and converge upon heedfulness and heedfulness is declared foremost among them.
an10.15:4.1 | S: Of all kinds of fragrant root, spikenard is said to be the best. | T: (4) “Just as, of all fragrant roots, black orris is declared foremost among them,
an10.15:4.2 | S: In the same way … | T: so too …
an10.15:5.1 | S: Of all kinds of fragrant heartwood, red sandalwood is said to be the best. | T: (5) “Just as, of all fragrant heartwoods, red sandalwood is declared foremost among them,
an10.15:5.2 | S: In the same way … | T: so too …
an10.15:6.1 | S: Of all kinds of fragrant flower, jasmine is said to be the best. | T: (6) “Just as, of all fragrant flowers, jasmine is declared foremost among them,
an10.15:6.2 | S: In the same way … | T: so too …
an10.15:7.1 | S: All lesser kings are vassals of a wheel-turning monarch, so the wheel-turning monarch is said to be the foremost of them all. | T: (7) “Just as all petty princes are the vassals of a wheel-turning monarch, and the wheel-turning monarch is declared foremost among them,
an10.15:7.2 | S: In the same way … | T: so too …
an10.15:8.1 | S: The radiance of all the stars is not worth a sixteenth part of the moon’s radiance, so the moon’s radiance is said to be the best of them all. | T: (8) “Just as the radiance of all the stars does not amount to a sixteenth part of the radiance of the moon, and the radiance of the moon is declared foremost among them,
an10.15:8.2 | S: In the same way … | T: so too …
an10.15:9.1 | S: In the autumn the heavens are sunny and cloudless. And as the sun is rising to the firmament, having dispelled all the darkness of space, it shines and glows and dazzles. | T: (9) “Just as, in the autumn, when the sky is clear and cloudless, the sun, ascending in the sky, dispels all darkness from space as it shines and beams and radiates,
an10.15:9.2 | S: In the same way … | T: so too …
an10.15:10.1 | S: All the great rivers—that is, the Ganges, Yamunā, Aciravatī, Sarabhū, and Mahī—flow, slant, slope, and incline toward the ocean, and the ocean is said to be the greatest of them. | T: (10) “Just as, whatever great rivers there are—that is, the Ganges, the Yamunā, the Aciravatī, the Sarabhū, and the Mahī—all head toward the ocean, slant, slope, and incline toward the ocean, and the ocean is declared foremost among them,
an10.15:10.2 | S: In the same way, all skillful qualities are rooted in diligence and meet at diligence, and diligence is said to be the best of them.” | T: so too, all wholesome qualities are rooted in heedfulness and converge upon heedfulness and heedfulness is declared foremost among them.”
an10.15:10.3 | P: Pañcamaṁ. | T: (none)

## an10.3
an10.3:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a vital condition for having no regrets. | T: “Bhikkhus, (1) for an immoral person, for one deficient in virtuous behavior, (2) non-regret lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:1.2 | S: When there are regrets, one who has regrets has destroyed a vital condition for joy. | T: When there is no non-regret, for one deficient in non-regret, (3) joy lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:1.3 | S: When there is no joy, one who lacks joy has destroyed a vital condition for rapture. | T: When there is no joy, for one deficient in joy, (4) rapture lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:1.4 | S: When there is no rapture, one who lacks rapture has destroyed a vital condition for tranquility. | T: When there is no rapture, for one deficient in rapture, (5) tranquility lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:1.5 | S: When there is no tranquility, one who lacks tranquility has destroyed a vital condition for bliss. | T: When there is no tranquility, for one deficient in tranquility, (6) pleasure lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:1.6 | S: When there is no bliss, one who lacks bliss has destroyed a vital condition for right immersion. | T: When there is no pleasure, for one deficient in pleasure, (7) right concentration lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:1.7 | S: When there is no right immersion, one who lacks right immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true knowledge and vision. | T: When there is no right concentration, for one deficient in right concentration, (8) the knowledge and vision of things as they really are lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:1.8 | S: When there is no true knowledge and vision, one who lacks true knowledge and vision has destroyed a vital condition for disillusionment and dispassion. | T: When there is no knowledge and vision of things as they really are, for one deficient in the knowledge and vision of things as they really are, (9) disenchantment and dispassion lack their proximate cause.
an10.3:1.9 | S: When there is no disillusionment and dispassion, one who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom. | T: When there is no disenchantment and dispassion, for one deficient in disenchantment and dispassion, (10) the knowledge and vision of liberation lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:1.10 | S: Suppose there was a tree that lacked branches and foliage. Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would not grow to fullness. | T: “Suppose there is a tree deficient in branches and foliage. Then its shoots do not grow to fullness; also its bark, softwood, and heartwood do not grow to fullness.
an10.3:1.11 | S: In the same way, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a vital condition for having no regrets. | T: So too, for an immoral person, one deficient in virtuous behavior, non-regret lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:1.12 | S: When there are regrets, one who has regrets has destroyed a vital condition for joy. … | T: When there is no non-regret …
an10.3:1.13 | S: One who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom. | T: the knowledge and vision of liberation lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.1 | S: An ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital condition for not having regrets. | T: “Bhikkhus, (1) for a virtuous person, for one whose behavior is virtuous, (2) non-regret possesses its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.2 | S: When there are no regrets, one who has no regrets has fulfilled a vital condition for joy. | T: When there is non-regret, for one possessing non-regret, (3) joy possesses its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.3 | S: When there is joy, one who has fulfilled joy has fulfilled a vital condition for rapture. | T: When there is joy, for one possessing joy, (4) rapture possesses its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.4 | S: When there is rapture, one who has fulfilled rapture has fulfilled a vital condition for tranquility. | T: When there is rapture, for one possessing rapture, (5) tranquility possesses its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.5 | S: When there is tranquility, one who has fulfilled tranquility has fulfilled a vital condition for bliss. | T: When there is tranquility, for one possessing tranquility, (6) pleasure possesses its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.6 | S: When there is bliss, one who has fulfilled bliss has fulfilled a vital condition for right immersion. | T: When there is pleasure, for one possessing pleasure, (7) right concentration possesses its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.7 | S: When there is right immersion, one who has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital condition for true knowledge and vision. | T: When there is right concentration, for one possessing right concentration, (8) the knowledge and vision of things as they really are possesses its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.8 | S: When there is true knowledge and vision, one who has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has fulfilled a vital condition for disillusionment and dispassion. | T: When there is the knowledge and vision of things as they really are, for one possessing the knowledge and vision of things as they really are, (9) disenchantment and dispassion possess their proximate cause.
an10.3:2.9 | S: When there is disillusionment and dispassion, one who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom. | T: When there is disenchantment and dispassion, for one possessing disenchantment and dispassion, (10) the knowledge and vision of liberation possesses its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.10 | S: Suppose there was a tree that was complete with branches and foliage. Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would grow to fullness. | T: “Suppose there is a tree possessing branches and foliage. Then its shoots grow to fullness; also its bark, softwood, and heartwood grow to fullness.
an10.3:2.11 | S: In the same way, an ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital condition for not having regrets. | T: So too, for a virtuous person, one whose behavior is virtuous, non-regret possesses its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.12 | S: When there are no regrets, one who has no regrets has fulfilled a vital condition for joy. … | T: When there is non-regret …
an10.3:2.13 | S: One who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.” | T: the knowledge and vision of liberation possesses its proximate cause.”
an10.3:2.14 | P: Tatiyaṁ. | T: (none)

## an10.59
an10.59:1.1 | S: “So you should train like this: | T: “Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus:
an10.59:1.2 | S: ‘Our minds will be consolidated as they were when we went forth, and arisen bad unskillful qualities will not occupy our minds. | T: ‘Our minds will be strengthened in accordance with the spirit of our going forth, and arisen bad unwholesome qualities will not obsess our minds.
an10.59:1.3 | S: Our minds will be consolidated in the perceptions of impermanence, not-self, ugliness, and drawbacks. Knowing what is fair and unfair in the world, our minds will be consolidated in that perception. Knowing  existence and nonexistence in the world, our minds will be consolidated in that perception. Knowing the origin and disappearance of the world, our minds will be consolidated in that perception. Our minds will be consolidated in the perceptions of giving up, fading away, and cessation.’ | T: (1) Our minds will be strengthened in the perception of impermanence. (2) Our minds will be strengthened in the perception of non-self. (3) Our minds will be strengthened in the perception of unattractiveness. (4) Our minds will be strengthened in the perception of danger. (5) We will know the even and uneven ways of the world, and our minds will be strengthened in this perception. (6) We will know the coming into being and extermination of the world, and our minds will be strengthened in this perception. (7) We will know the origination and passing away of the world, and our minds will be strengthened in this perception. (8) Our minds will be strengthened in the perception of abandoning. (9) Our minds will be strengthened in the perception of dispassion. (10) Our minds will be strengthened in the perception of cessation.’
an10.59:1.4 | S: That’s how you should train. | T: It is in such a way that you should you train yourselves.
an10.59:2.1 | S: When your minds are consolidated in these ten perceptions, you can expect one of two results: | T: “When a bhikkhu’s mind has been strengthened in accordance with the spirit of his going forth, and arisen bad unwholesome qualities do not obsess his mind—when his mind has been strengthened in the perception of impermanence … when his mind has been strengthened in the perception of cessation—one of two fruits is to be expected for him:
an10.59:2.2 | S: enlightenment in this very life, or if there’s residue left behind, non-return.” | T: either final knowledge in this very life or, if there is a residue remaining, the state of non-returning.”
an10.59:2.3 | P: Navamaṁ. | T: (none)

## an10.61
an10.61:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, it is said that no prior point of ignorance is found, before which there was no ignorance, and afterwards it came to be. | T: “Bhikkhus, this is said: ‘A first point of ignorance, bhikkhus, is not seen such that before this there was no ignorance and afterward it came into being.’
an10.61:1.2 | S: And yet it is evident that there is a specific condition for ignorance. | T: Still, ignorance is seen to have a specific condition.
an10.61:2.1 | S: I say that ignorance is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. | T: “I say, bhikkhus, that ignorance has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
an10.61:2.2 | S: And what is the fuel for ignorance? | T: And what is the nutriment for ignorance?
an10.61:2.3 | S: You should say: ‘The five hindrances.’ | T: It should be said: the five hindrances.
an10.61:2.4 | S: I say that the five hindrances are fueled by something, they’re not unfueled. | T: The five hindrances, too, I say, have a nutriment; they are not without nutriment.
an10.61:2.5 | S: And what is the fuel for the five hindrances? | T: And what is the nutriment for the five hindrances?
an10.61:2.6 | S: You should say: ‘The three kinds of misconduct.’ | T: It should be said: the three kinds of misconduct.
an10.61:2.7 | S: I say that the three kinds of misconduct are fueled by something, they’re not unfueled. | T: The three kinds of misconduct, too, I say, have a nutriment; they are not without nutriment.
an10.61:2.8 | S: And what is the fuel for the three kinds of misconduct? | T: And what is the nutriment for the three kinds of misconduct?
an10.61:2.9 | S: You should say: ‘Lack of sense restraint.’ | T: It should be said: non-restraint of the sense faculties.
an10.61:2.10 | S: I say that lack of sense restraint is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. | T: Non-restraint of the sense faculties, too, I say, has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
an10.61:2.11 | S: And what is the fuel for lack of sense restraint? | T: And what is the nutriment for non-restraint of the sense faculties?
an10.61:2.12 | S: You should say: ‘Lack of mindfulness and situational awareness.’ | T: It should be said: lack of mindfulness and clear comprehension.
an10.61:2.13 | S: I say that lack of mindfulness and situational awareness is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. | T: Lack of mindfulness and clear comprehension, too, I say, has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
an10.61:2.14 | S: And what is the fuel for lack of mindfulness and situational awareness? | T: And what is the nutriment for lack of mindfulness and clear comprehension?
an10.61:2.15 | S: You should say: ‘Irrational application of mind.’ | T: It should be said: careless attention.
an10.61:2.16 | S: I say that irrational application of mind is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. | T: Careless attention, too, I say, has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
an10.61:2.17 | S: And what is the fuel for irrational application of mind? | T: And what is the nutriment for careless attention?
an10.61:2.18 | S: You should say: ‘Lack of faith.’ | T: It should be said: lack of faith.
an10.61:2.19 | S: I say that lack of faith is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. | T: Lack of faith, too, I say, has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
an10.61:2.20 | S: And what is the fuel for lack of faith? | T: And what is the nutriment for lack of faith?
an10.61:2.21 | S: You should say: ‘Listening to an untrue teaching.’ | T: It should be said: not hearing the good Dhamma.
an10.61:2.22 | S: I say that listening to an untrue teaching is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. | T: Not hearing the good Dhamma, too, I say, has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
an10.61:2.23 | S: And what is the fuel for listening to an untrue teaching? | T: And what is the nutriment for not hearing the good Dhamma?
an10.61:2.24 | S: You should say: ‘Associating with untrue persons.’ | T: It should be said: not associating with good persons.
an10.61:3.1 | S: In this way, when the factor of associating with untrue persons is fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of listening to an untrue teaching. When the factor of listening to an untrue teaching is fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of lack of faith … irrational application of mind … lack of mindfulness and situational awareness … lack of sense restraint … the three kinds of misconduct … the five hindrances. When the five hindrances are fulfilled, they fulfill ignorance. | T: “Thus not associating with good persons, becoming full, fills up not hearing the good Dhamma. Not hearing the good Dhamma, becoming full, fills up lack of faith. Lack of faith, becoming full, fills up careless attention. Careless attention, becoming full, fills up lack of mindfulness and clear comprehension. Lack of mindfulness and clear comprehension, becoming full, fills up non-restraint of the sense faculties. Non-restraint of the sense faculties, becoming full, fills up the three kinds of misconduct. The three kinds of misconduct, becoming full, fill up the five hindrances. The five hindrances, becoming full, fill up ignorance.
an10.61:3.2 | S: That’s the fuel for ignorance, and that’s how it’s fulfilled. | T: Thus there is nutriment for ignorance, and in this way it becomes full.
an10.61:4.1 | S: It’s like when the heavens rain heavily on a mountain top, and the water flows downhill to fill the hollows, crevices, and creeks. As they become full, they fill up the pools. The pools fill up the lakes, the lakes fill up the streams, and the streams fill up the rivers. And as the rivers become full, they fill up the ocean. | T: “Just as, when it is raining and the rain pours down in thick droplets on a mountaintop, the water flows down along the slope and fills the clefts, gullies, and creeks; these, becoming full, fill up the pools; these, becoming full, fill up the lakes; these, becoming full, fill up the streams; these, becoming full, fill up the rivers; and these, becoming full, fill up the great ocean;
an10.61:4.2 | S: That’s the fuel for the ocean, and that’s how it’s filled up. | T: thus there is nutriment for the great ocean, and in this way it becomes full.
an10.61:5.1 | S: In the same way, when the factor of associating with untrue persons is fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of listening to an untrue teaching. When the factor of listening to an untrue teaching is fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of lack of faith … irrational application of mind … lack of mindfulness and situational awareness … lack of sense restraint … the three kinds of misconduct … the five hindrances. When the five hindrances are fulfilled, they fulfill ignorance. | T: So too, not associating with good persons, becoming full, fills up not hearing the good Dhamma…. The five hindrances, becoming full, fill up ignorance.
an10.61:5.2 | S: That’s the fuel for ignorance, and that’s how it’s fulfilled. | T: Thus there is nutriment for ignorance, and in this way it becomes full.
an10.61:6.1 | S: I say that knowledge and freedom are fueled by something, they’re not unfueled. | T: “I say, bhikkhus, that (1) true knowledge and liberation have a nutriment; they are not without nutriment.
an10.61:6.2 | S: And what is the fuel for knowledge and freedom? | T: And what is the nutriment for true knowledge and liberation?
an10.61:6.3 | S: You should say: ‘The seven awakening factors.’ | T: It should be said: (2) the seven factors of enlightenment.
an10.61:6.4 | S: I say that the seven awakening factors are fueled by something, they’re not unfueled. | T: The seven factors of enlightenment, too, I say, have a nutriment; they are not without nutriment.
an10.61:6.5 | S: And what is the fuel for the seven awakening factors? | T: And what is the nutriment for the seven factors of enlightenment?
an10.61:6.6 | S: You should say: ‘The four kinds of mindfulness meditation.’ | T: It should be said: (3) the four establishments of mindfulness.
an10.61:6.7 | S: I say that the four kinds of mindfulness meditation are fueled by something, they’re not unfueled. | T: The four establishments of mindfulness, too, I say, have a nutriment; they are not without nutriment.
an10.61:6.8 | S: And what is the fuel for the four kinds of mindfulness meditation? | T: And what is the nutriment for the four establishments of mindfulness?
an10.61:6.9 | S: You should say: ‘The three kinds of good conduct.’ | T: It should be said: (4) the three kinds of good conduct.
an10.61:6.10 | S: I say that the three kinds of good conduct are fueled by something, they’re not unfueled. | T: The three kinds of good conduct, too, I say, have a nutriment; they are not without nutriment.
an10.61:6.11 | S: And what is the fuel for the three kinds of good conduct? | T: And what is the nutriment for the three kinds of good conduct?
an10.61:6.12 | S: You should say: ‘Sense restraint.’ | T: It should be said: (5) restraint of the sense faculties.
an10.61:6.13 | S: I say that sense restraint is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. | T: Restraint of the sense faculties, too, I say, has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
an10.61:6.14 | S: And what is the fuel for sense restraint? | T: And what is the nutriment for restraint of the sense faculties?
an10.61:6.15 | S: You should say: ‘Mindfulness and situational awareness.’ | T: It should be said: (6) mindfulness and clear comprehension.
an10.61:6.16 | S: I say that mindfulness and situational awareness is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. | T: Mindfulness and clear comprehension, too, I say, have a nutriment; they are not without nutriment.
an10.61:6.17 | S: And what is the fuel for mindfulness and situational awareness? | T: And what is the nutriment for mindfulness and clear comprehension?
an10.61:6.18 | S: You should say: ‘Rational application of mind.’ | T: It should be said: (7) careful attention.
an10.61:6.19 | S: I say that rational application of mind is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. | T: Careful attention, too, I say, has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
an10.61:6.20 | S: And what is the fuel for rational application of mind? | T: And what is the nutriment for careful attention?
an10.61:6.21 | S: You should say: ‘Faith.’ | T: It should be said: (8) faith.
an10.61:6.22 | S: I say that faith is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. | T: Faith, too, I say, has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
an10.61:6.23 | S: And what is the fuel for faith? | T: And what is the nutriment for faith?
an10.61:6.24 | S: You should say: ‘Listening to the true teaching.’ | T: It should be said: (9) hearing the good Dhamma.
an10.61:6.25 | S: I say that listening to the true teaching is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. | T: Hearing the good Dhamma, too, I say, has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
an10.61:6.26 | S: And what is the fuel for listening to the true teaching? | T: And what is the nutriment for hearing the good Dhamma?
an10.61:6.27 | S: You should say: ‘Associating with true persons.’ | T: It should be said: (10) associating with good persons.
an10.61:7.1 | S: In this way, when the factor of associating with true persons is fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of listening to the true teaching. When the factor of listening to the true teaching is fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of faith … rational application of mind … mindfulness and situational awareness … sense restraint … the three kinds of good conduct … the four kinds of mindfulness meditation … the seven awakening factors. When the seven awakening factors are fulfilled, they fulfill knowledge and freedom. | T: “Thus associating with good persons, becoming full, fills up hearing the good Dhamma. Hearing the good Dhamma, becoming full, fills up faith. Faith, becoming full, fills up careful attention. Careful attention, becoming full, fills up mindfulness and clear comprehension. Mindfulness and clear comprehension, becoming full, fill up restraint of the sense faculties. Restraint of the sense faculties, becoming full, fills up the three kinds of good conduct. The three kinds of good conduct, becoming full, fill up the four establishments of mindfulness. The four establishments of mindfulness, becoming full, fill up the seven factors of enlightenment. The seven factors of enlightenment, becoming full, fill up true knowledge and liberation.
an10.61:7.2 | S: That’s the fuel for knowledge and freedom, and that’s how it’s fulfilled. | T: Thus there is nutriment for true knowledge and liberation, and in this way they become full.
an10.61:8.1 | S: It’s like when the heavens rain heavily on a mountain top, and the water flows downhill to fill the hollows, crevices, and creeks. As they become full, they fill up the pools. The pools fill up the lakes, the lakes fill up the streams, and the streams fill up the rivers. And as the rivers become full, they fill up the ocean. | T: “Just as, when it is raining and the rain pours down in thick droplets on a mountaintop, the water flows down along the slope and fills the clefts, gullies, and creeks; these, becoming full, fill up the pools; these, becoming full, fill up the lakes; these, becoming full, fill up the streams; these, becoming full, fill up the rivers; and these, becoming full, fill up the great ocean;
an10.61:8.2 | S: That’s the fuel for the ocean, and that’s how it’s filled up. | T: thus there is nutriment for the great ocean, and in this way it becomes full.
an10.61:9.1 | S: In the same way, when the factor of associating with true persons is fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of listening to the true teaching. When the factor of listening to the true teaching is fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of faith … rational application of mind … mindfulness and situational awareness … sense restraint … the three kinds of good conduct … the four kinds of mindfulness meditation … the seven awakening factors. When the seven awakening factors are fulfilled, they fulfill knowledge and freedom. | T: So too, associating with good persons, becoming full, fills up hearing the good Dhamma…. The seven factors of enlightenment, becoming full, fill up true knowledge and liberation.
an10.61:9.2 | S: That’s the fuel for knowledge and freedom, and that’s how it’s fulfilled.” | T: Thus there is nutriment for true knowledge and liberation, and in this way they become full.”
an10.61:9.3 | P: Paṭhamaṁ. | T: (none)

## an3.28
an3.28:1.1 | S: “These three individuals are found in the world. | T: “Bhikkhus, there are these three kinds of persons found existing in the world.
an3.28:1.2 | S: What three? | T: What three?
an3.28:1.3 | S: One with speech like dung, one with speech like flowers, and one with speech like honey. | T: The one whose speech is like dung, the one whose speech is like flowers, and the one whose speech is like honey.
an3.28:1.4 | S: And who has speech like dung? | T: (1) “And what, bhikkhus, is the person whose speech is like dung?
an3.28:1.5 | S: It’s an individual who is summoned to a council, an assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to bear witness: ‘Please, my man, say what you know.’ Not knowing, they say ‘I know.’ Knowing, they say ‘I don’t know.’ Not seeing, they say ‘I see.’ And seeing, they say ‘I don’t see.’ So they deliberately lie for the sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly reason. | T: Here, if he is summoned to a council, to an assembly, to his relatives’ presence, to his guild, or to the court, and questioned as a witness thus: ‘So, good man, tell what you know,’ then, not knowing, this person says, ‘I know,’ or knowing, he says, ‘I do not know’; not seeing, he says, ‘I see,’ or seeing, he says, ‘I do not see.’ Thus he consciously speaks falsehood for his own ends, or for another’s ends, or for some trifling worldly end.
an3.28:1.6 | S: This is called an individual with speech like dung. | T: This is called the person whose speech is like dung.
an3.28:2.1 | S: And who has speech like flowers? | T: (2) “And what is the person whose speech is like flowers?
an3.28:2.2 | S: It’s an individual who is summoned to a council, an assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to bear witness: ‘Please, my man, say what you know.’ Not knowing, they say ‘I don’t know.’ Knowing, they say ‘I know.’ Not seeing, they say ‘I don’t see.’ And seeing, they say ‘I see.’ So they don’t deliberately lie for the sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly reason. | T: Here, if he is summoned to a council, to an assembly, to his relatives’ presence, to his guild, or to the court, and questioned as a witness thus: ‘So, good man, tell what you know,’ then, not knowing, this person says, ‘I do not know,’ or knowing, he says, ‘I know’; not seeing, he says, ‘I do not see,’ or seeing, he says, ‘I see’; he does not consciously speak falsehood for his own ends, or for another’s ends, or for some trifling worldly end.
an3.28:2.3 | S: This is called an individual with speech like flowers. | T: This is called the person whose speech is like flowers.
an3.28:3.1 | S: And who has speech like honey? | T: (3) “And what is the person whose speech is like honey?
an3.28:3.2 | S: It’s an individual who gives up harsh speech. | T: Here, some person, having abandoned harsh speech, abstains from harsh speech.
an3.28:3.3 | S: They speak in a way that’s mellow, pleasing to the ear, endearing, going to the heart, polite, and likable and agreeable to the people. | T: He speaks such words as are gentle, pleasing to the ear, and lovable, as go to the heart, are courteous, desired by many, and agreeable to many.
an3.28:3.4 | S: This is called an individual with speech like honey. | T: This is the person whose speech is like honey.
an3.28:3.5 | S: These are the three individuals found in the world.” | T: “These, bhikkhus, are the three kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
an3.28:3.6 | P: Aṭṭhamaṁ. | T: (none)

## an3.46
an3.46:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, when ethical renunciates are supported by a town or village, | T: “Bhikkhus, when virtuous renunciants dwell in dependence on a village or a town,
an3.46:1.2 | S: the people there brim with much merit in three ways. | T: the people there generate much merit in three ways.
an3.46:1.3 | S: What three? | T: What three?
an3.46:1.4 | S: By way of body, speech, and mind. | T: By body, speech, and mind.
an3.46:1.5 | S: When ethical renunciates are supported by a town or village, | T: When virtuous renunciants dwell in dependence on a village or a town,
an3.46:1.6 | S: the people there brim with much merit in these three ways.” | T: the people there generate much merit in these three ways.”
an3.46:1.7 | P: Chaṭṭhaṁ. | T: (none)

## an3.53
an3.53:1.1 | S: Then a brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. Seated to one side he said to the Buddha: | T: Then a certain brahmin approached the Blessed One … and said to him:
an3.53:1.2 | S: “Worthy Gotama, they speak of ‘a teaching apparent in the present life’. | T: “Master Gotama, it is said: ‘A directly visible Dhamma, a directly visible Dhamma.’
an3.53:1.3 | S: In what way is the teaching apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves?” | T: In what way is the Dhamma directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise?”
an3.53:2.1 | S: “A greedy person, overcome and overwhelmed by greed, intends to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. | T: (1) “Brahmin, one excited by lust, overcome by lust, with mind obsessed by it, intends for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, and for the affliction of both, and he experiences mental suffering and dejection.
an3.53:2.2 | S: When greed has been given up, they don’t intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They don’t experience mental pain and sadness. | T: But when lust is abandoned, he does not intend for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both, and he does not experience mental suffering and dejection.
an3.53:2.3 | P: Ratto kho …pe… kāyena duccaritaṁ carati, vācāya duccaritaṁ carati, manasā duccaritaṁ carati. | T: (none)
an3.53:2.4 | P: Rāge pahīne neva kāyena duccaritaṁ carati, na vācāya duccaritaṁ carati, na manasā duccaritaṁ carati. | T: (none)
an3.53:2.5 | P: Ratto kho …pe… attatthampi yathābhūtaṁ nappajānāti, paratthampi yathābhūtaṁ nappajānāti, ubhayatthampi yathābhūtaṁ nappajānāti. | T: (none)
an3.53:2.6 | P: Rāge pahīne attatthampi yathābhūtaṁ pajānāti, paratthampi yathābhūtaṁ pajānāti, ubhayatthampi yathābhūtaṁ pajānāti. | T: (none)
an3.53:2.7 | S: This is how the teaching is apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves. | T: It is in this way that the Dhamma is directly visible….
an3.53:3.1 | S: A hateful person, overcome by hate, intends to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. | T: (2) “One full of hate, overcome by hatred, with mind obsessed by it, intends for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, and for the affliction of both, and he experiences mental suffering and dejection.
an3.53:3.2 | S: When hate has been given up, they don’t intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They don’t experience mental pain and sadness. | T: But when hatred is abandoned, he does not intend for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both, and he does not experience mental suffering and dejection.
an3.53:3.3 | S: This, too, is how the teaching is apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves. | T: It is in this way, too, that the Dhamma is directly visible….
an3.53:4.1 | S: A deluded person, overcome by delusion, intends to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. | T: (3) “One who is deluded, overcome by delusion, with mind obsessed by it, intends for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, and for the affliction of both, and he experiences mental suffering and dejection.
an3.53:4.2 | S: When delusion has been given up, they don’t intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They don’t experience mental pain and sadness. | T: But when delusion is abandoned, he does not intend for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both, and he does not experience mental suffering and dejection.
an3.53:4.3 | S: This, too, is how the teaching is apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.” | T: It is in this way, too, that the Dhamma is directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.”
an3.53:5.1 | S: “Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! | T: “Excellent, Master Gotama! Excellent, Master Gotama!
an3.53:5.2 | S: As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, worthy Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. | T: Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the darkness so those with good eyesight can see forms.
an3.53:5.3 | S: I go for refuge to the worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. | T: I now go for refuge to Master Gotama, to the Dhamma, and to the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
an3.53:5.4 | S: From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” | T: Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
an3.53:5.5 | P: Tatiyaṁ. | T: (none)

## an3.63
an3.63:1.1 | S: At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he arrived at a village of the Kosalan brahmins named Venāgapura. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering on tour among the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of bhikkhus when he reached the Kosalan brahmin village named Venāgapura.
an3.63:1.2 | S: The brahmins and householders of Venāgapura heard: | T: The brahmin householders of Venāgapura heard:
an3.63:1.3 | S: “It seems the ascetic Gotama—a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family—has arrived at Venāgapura. | T: “It is said that the ascetic Gotama, the son of the Sakyans who went forth from a Sakyan family, has arrived at Venāgapura.
an3.63:1.4 | S: He has this good reputation: | T: Now a good report about that Master Gotama has circulated thus:
an3.63:1.5 | S: ‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ | T: ‘That Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.
an3.63:1.6 | S: He has realized with his own insight this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—and he makes it known to others. | T: Having realized by his own direct knowledge this world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans, he makes it known to others.
an3.63:1.7 | S: He teaches Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. | T: He teaches a Dhamma that is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing; he reveals a spiritual life that is perfectly complete and pure.’
an3.63:1.8 | S: It’s good to see such perfected ones.” | T: Now it is good to see such arahants.”
an3.63:2.1 | S: Then the brahmins and householders of Venāgapura went up to the Buddha. Before sitting down to one side, some bowed, some exchanged greetings and polite conversation, some held up their cupped palms toward the Buddha, some announced their name and clan, while some kept silent. Then the brahmin Vacchagotta of Venāgapura said to the Buddha: | T: Then the brahmin householders of Venāgapura approached the Blessed One. Some paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down to one side; some exchanged greetings with him and, when they had concluded their greetings and cordial talk, sat down to one side; some reverentially saluted him and sat down to one side; some pronounced their name and clan and sat down to one side; some kept silent and sat down to one side. The brahmin Vacchagotta of Venāgapura then said to the Blessed One:
an3.63:3.1 | S: “It’s incredible, worthy Gotama, it’s amazing, | T: “It is astounding and amazing, Master Gotama,
an3.63:3.2 | S: how your faculties are so very clear, and the complexion of your skin is pure and bright. | T: how Master Gotama’s faculties are tranquil and the color of his skin is pure and bright.
an3.63:3.3 | S: It’s like a golden brown jujube in the autumn, | T: Just as a yellow jujube fruit in the autumn is pure and bright,
an3.63:3.4 | P: evamevaṁ bhoto gotamassa vippasannāni indriyāni parisuddho chavivaṇṇo pariyodāto. | T: so Master Gotama’s faculties are tranquil and the color of his skin is pure and bright.
an3.63:3.5 | S: or a ripe palmyra fruit freshly plucked from the stalk, | T: Just as a palm fruit that has just been removed from its stalk is pure and bright,
an3.63:3.6 | P: evamevaṁ bhoto gotamassa vippasannāni indriyāni parisuddho chavivaṇṇo pariyodāto. | T: so Master Gotama’s faculties are tranquil and the color of his skin is pure and bright.
an3.63:3.7 | S: or a pendant of Black Plum River gold, fashioned by a deft smith, well-wrought in the forge, and placed on a cream rug where it shines and glows and dazzles. | T: Just as an ornament of finest gold, well prepared by a skilled goldsmith and very skillfully wrought in the furnace, placed on red brocade, shines and beams and radiates,
an3.63:3.8 | S: In the same way, your faculties are so very clear, and the complexion of your skin is pure and bright. | T: so Master Gotama’s faculties are tranquil and the color of his skin is pure and bright.
an3.63:3.9 | S: Surely the worthy Gotama gets when he wants, without trouble or difficulty, various kinds of high and luxurious bedding, such as: | T: “Whatever high and luxurious kinds of bedding there are—that is,
an3.63:3.10 | S: sofas, couches, woolen covers—shag-piled, colorful, white, embroidered with flowers, quilted, embroidered with animals, double or single fringed—and silk covers studded with gems, as well as silken sheets, wollen carpets, rugs for elephants, horses, or chariots, black antelope hides and woven rugs, and spreads of fine deer hide, with a canopy above and red cushions at both ends.” | T: a sofa, a divan, a long-haired coverlet, a coverlet of diverse colors, a white coverlet, a woolen coverlet with floral designs, a quilt of cotton wool, a woolen coverlet ornamented with animal figures, a woolen coverlet with double borders, a woolen coverlet with a single border, a silken sheet studded with gems, a sheet made with silk threads and studded with gems, a dancer’s rug, an elephant rug, a horse rug, a chariot rug, a rug of antelope hide, a spread made of the hide of the kadali-deer, a bed with a canopy above and red bolsters at both ends—Master Gotama surely gains them at will, without trouble or difficulty.”
an3.63:4.1 | S: “Brahmin, these various kinds of high and luxurious bedding | T: “Brahmin, those high and luxurious kinds of bedding
an3.63:4.2 | P: āsandi pallaṅko gonako cittako paṭikā paṭalikā tūlikā vikatikā uddalomī ekantalomī kaṭṭissaṁ koseyyaṁ kuttakaṁ hatthattharaṁ assattharaṁ rathattharaṁ ajinappaveṇī kadalimigapavarapaccattharaṇaṁ sauttaracchadaṁ ubhatolohitakūpadhānaṁ. | T: (none)
an3.63:4.3 | S: are hard for renunciates to find. And even if they do get them, they’re not allowed. | T: are rarely obtained by those who have gone forth, and if they are obtained, they are not allowed.
an3.63:5.1 | S: There are, brahmin, these three high and luxurious beds that I get these days when I want, without trouble or difficulty. | T: “But, brahmin, there are three kinds of high and luxurious beds that at present I gain at will, without trouble or difficulty.
an3.63:5.2 | S: What three? | T: What three?
an3.63:5.3 | S: The heavenly high and luxurious bed, the divine high and luxurious bed, and the noble high and luxurious bed. | T: The celestial high and luxurious bed, the divine high and luxurious bed, and the noble high and luxurious bed.
an3.63:5.4 | S: These are the three high and luxurious beds that I get these days when I want, without trouble or difficulty.” | T: These are the three kinds of high and luxurious beds that at present I gain at will, without trouble or difficulty.”
an3.63:6.1 | S: “But what, worthy Gotama, is the heavenly high and luxurious bed?” | T: (1) “But, Master Gotama, what is the celestial high and luxurious bed that at present you gain at will, without trouble or difficulty?”
an3.63:6.2 | S: “Brahmin, when I am living supported by a village or town, I robe up in the morning and, taking my bowl and robe, enter the town or village for alms. | T: “Here, brahmin, when I am dwelling in dependence on a village or town, in the morning I dress, take my bowl and robe, and enter that village or town for alms.
an3.63:6.3 | S: After the meal, on my return from almsround, I enter within a forest. | T: After the meal, when I have returned from the alms round, I enter a grove.
an3.63:6.4 | S: I gather up some grass or leaves into a pile and sit down cross-legged, setting my body straight, and bringing mindfulness to the present. | T: I collect some grass or leaves that I find there into a pile and then sit down. Having folded my legs crosswise and straightened my body, I establish mindfulness in front of me.
an3.63:6.5 | S: Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, I enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: Then, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, I enter and dwell in the first jhāna, which consists of rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by thought and examination.
an3.63:6.6 | S: As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, I enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: With the subsiding of thought and examination, I enter and dwell in the second jhāna, which has internal placidity and unification of mind and consists of rapture and pleasure born of concentration, without thought and examination.
an3.63:6.7 | S: And with the fading away of rapture, I enter and remain in the third absorption, where I meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, experiencing for themselves the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’ | T: With the fading away as well of rapture, I dwell equanimous and, mindful and clearly comprehending, I experience pleasure with the body; I enter and dwell in the third jhāna of which the noble ones declare: ‘He is equanimous, mindful, one who dwells happily.’
an3.63:6.8 | S: With the giving up of pleasure and pain, and the disappearance of former happiness and sadness, I enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. | T: With the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous passing away of joy and dejection, I enter and dwell in the fourth jhāna, neither painful nor pleasant, which has purification of mindfulness by equanimity.
an3.63:6.9 | S: When I’m practicing like this, if I walk, at that time my walking is heavenly. | T: “Then, brahmin, when I am in such a state, if I walk back and forth, on that occasion my walking back and forth is celestial.
an3.63:6.10 | S: When I’m practicing like this, if I stand, at that time my standing is heavenly. | T: If I am standing, on that occasion my standing is celestial.
an3.63:6.11 | S: When I’m practicing like this, if I sit, at that time my sitting is heavenly. | T: If I am sitting, on that occasion my sitting is celestial.
an3.63:6.12 | S: When I’m practicing like this, if I lie down, at that time my lying is heavenly. | T: If I lie down, on that occasion this is my celestial high and luxurious bed.
an3.63:6.13 | S: This is the heavenly high and luxurious bed that I get these days when I want, without trouble or difficulty.” | T: This is that celestial high and luxurious bed that at present I can gain at will, without trouble or difficulty.”
an3.63:7.1 | S: “It’s incredible, worthy Gotama, it’s amazing! | T: “It is astounding and amazing, Master Gotama!
an3.63:7.2 | S: Who but the worthy Gotama could get such a heavenly high and luxurious bed when he wants, without trouble or difficulty? | T: Who else, apart from Master Gotama, can gain at will, without trouble or difficulty, such a celestial high and luxurious bed?
an3.63:8.1 | S: But what, worthy Gotama, is the divine high and luxurious bed?” | T: (2) “But, Master Gotama, what is the divine high and luxurious bed that at present you gain at will, without trouble or difficulty?”
an3.63:8.2 | S: “Brahmin, when I am living supported by a village or town, I robe up in the morning and, taking my bowl and robe, enter the town or village for alms. | T: “Here, brahmin, when I am dwelling in dependence on a village or town, in the morning I dress, take my bowl and robe, and enter that village or town for alms.
an3.63:8.3 | S: After the meal, on my return from almsround, I enter within a forest. | T: After the meal, when I have returned from the alms round, I enter a grove.
an3.63:8.4 | S: I gather up some grass or leaves into a pile and sit down cross-legged, setting my body straight, and bringing mindfulness to the present. | T: I collect some grass or leaves that I find there into a pile and then sit down. Having folded my legs crosswise and straightened my body, I establish mindfulness in front of me.
an3.63:8.5 | S: I meditate spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, I spread a heart full of love to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. | T: Then I dwell pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter. Thus above, below, across, and everywhere, and to all as to myself, I dwell pervading the entire world with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, vast, exalted, measureless, without enmity, without ill will.
an3.63:8.6 | S: I meditate spreading a heart full of compassion to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, I spread a heart full of compassion to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. | T: I dwell pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with compassion …
an3.63:8.7 | S: I meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, I spread a heart full of rejoicing to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. | T: with a mind imbued with altruistic joy …
an3.63:8.8 | S: I meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, I spread a heart full of equanimity to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. | T: with a mind imbued with equanimity, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter. Thus above, below, across, and everywhere, and to all as to myself, I dwell pervading the entire world with a mind imbued with equanimity, vast, exalted, measureless, without enmity, without ill will.
an3.63:8.9 | S: When I’m practicing like this, if I walk, at that time my walking is divine. | T: “Then, brahmin, when I am in such a state, if I walk back and forth, on that occasion my walking back and forth is divine.
