## an10.27, continued
an10.27:17.1 | P: ‘Aṭṭha pañhā aṭṭhuddesā aṭṭha veyyākaraṇānī’ti, iti kho panetaṁ vuttaṁ. | T: (8) “When it was said: ‘A question about eight, a concise statement about eight, an explanation of eight,’
an10.27:17.2 | P: Kiñcetaṁ paṭicca vuttaṁ? | T: with reference to what was this said?
an10.27:17.3 | P: Aṭṭhasu, bhikkhave, dhammesu bhikkhu sammā nibbindamāno sammā virajjamāno sammā vimuccamāno sammā pariyantadassāvī sammadatthaṁ abhisamecca diṭṭheva dhamme dukkhassantakaro hoti. | T: When a bhikkhu is completely disenchanted with eight things, completely dispassionate toward them, completely liberated from them, completely sees their delimitations, and completely breaks through their meaning, in this very life he makes an end of suffering.
an10.27:17.4 | S: What eight? | T: What eight things?
an10.27:17.5 | S: The eight worldly conditions. … | T: The eight worldly conditions.
an10.27:17.6 | P: imesu kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭhasu dhammesu bhikkhu sammā nibbindamāno …pe… dukkhassantakaro hoti. | T: When a bhikkhu is completely disenchanted with these eight things … in this very life he makes an end of suffering.
an10.27:17.7 | P: ‘Aṭṭha pañhā aṭṭhuddesā aṭṭha veyyākaraṇānī’ti, iti yaṁ taṁ vuttaṁ idametaṁ paṭicca vuttaṁ. | T: “When it was said: ‘A question about eight, a concise statement about eight, an explanation of eight,’ it is with reference to this that this was said.
an10.27:18.1 | P: ‘Nava pañhā navuddesā nava veyyākaraṇānī’ti, iti kho panetaṁ vuttaṁ. | T: (9) “When it was said: ‘A question about nine, a concise statement about nine, an explanation of nine,’
an10.27:18.2 | P: Kiñcetaṁ paṭicca vuttaṁ? | T: with reference to what was this said?
an10.27:18.3 | P: Navasu, bhikkhave, dhammesu bhikkhu sammā nibbindamāno sammā virajjamāno sammā vimuccamāno sammā pariyantadassāvī sammadatthaṁ abhisamecca diṭṭheva dhamme dukkhassantakaro hoti. | T: When a bhikkhu is completely disenchanted with nine things, completely dispassionate toward them, completely liberated from them, completely sees their delimitations, and completely breaks through their meaning, in this very life he makes an end of suffering.
an10.27:18.4 | S: What nine? | T: What nine things?
an10.27:18.5 | S: The nine abodes of sentient beings. … | T: The nine abodes of beings.
an10.27:18.6 | P: imesu kho, bhikkhave, navasu dhammesu bhikkhu sammā nibbindamāno sammā virajjamāno sammā vimuccamāno sammā pariyantadassāvī sammadatthaṁ abhisamecca diṭṭheva dhamme dukkhassantakaro hoti. | T: When a bhikkhu is completely disenchanted with these nine things … in this very life he makes an end of suffering.
an10.27:18.7 | P: ‘Nava pañhā navuddesā nava veyyākaraṇānī’ti, iti yaṁ taṁ vuttaṁ idametaṁ paṭicca vuttaṁ. | T: “When it was said: ‘A question about nine, a concise statement about nine, an explanation of nine,’ it is with reference to this that this was said.
an10.27:19.1 | S: ‘Ten things: question, summary recital, and answer.’ | T: (10) “When it was said: ‘A question about ten, a concise statement about ten, an explanation of ten,’
an10.27:19.2 | S: That’s what I said, but why did I say it? | T: with reference to what was this said?
an10.27:19.3 | S: Becoming completely disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed regarding ten things, seeing their limits and fully comprehending their meaning, a mendicant makes an end of suffering in this very life. | T: When a bhikkhu is completely disenchanted with ten things, completely dispassionate toward them, completely liberated from them, completely sees their delimitations, and completely breaks through their meaning, in this very life he makes an end of suffering.
an10.27:19.4 | S: What ten? | T: What ten things?
an10.27:19.5 | S: The ten ways of performing unskillful deeds. | T: The ten unwholesome courses of kamma.
an10.27:19.6 | S: Becoming completely disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed regarding these ten things, seeing their limits and fully comprehending their meaning, a mendicant makes an end of suffering in this very life. | T: When a bhikkhu is completely disenchanted with these ten things, completely dispassionate toward them, completely liberated from them, completely sees their delimitations, and completely breaks through their meaning, in this very life he makes an end of suffering.
an10.27:19.7 | S: ‘Ten things: question, summary recital, and answer.’ | T: “When it was said: ‘A question about ten, a concise statement about ten, an explanation of ten,’
an10.27:19.8 | S: That’s what I said, and this is why I said it.” | T: it is with reference to this that this was said.”
an10.27:19.9 | P: Sattamaṁ. | T: (none)

## an10.2
an10.2:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, an ethical person, who has fulfilled ethical conduct, need not make a wish: | T: (1)–(2) “Bhikkhus, for a virtuous person, one whose behavior is virtuous, no volition need be exerted:
an10.2:1.2 | S: ‘May I have no regrets!’ | T: ‘Let non-regret arise in me.’
an10.2:1.3 | S: It’s only natural that an ethical person has no regrets. | T: It is natural that non-regret arises in a virtuous person, one whose behavior is virtuous.
an10.2:1.4 | S: When you have no regrets you need not make a wish: | T: (3) “For one without regret no volition need be exerted:
an10.2:1.5 | S: ‘May I feel joy!’ | T: ‘Let joy arise in me.’
an10.2:1.6 | S: It’s only natural that joy springs up when you have no regrets. | T: It is natural that joy arises in one without regret.
an10.2:1.7 | S: When you feel joy you need not make a wish: | T: (4) “For one who is joyful no volition need be exerted:
an10.2:1.8 | S: ‘May I experience rapture!’ | T: ‘Let rapture arise in me.’
an10.2:1.9 | S: It’s only natural that rapture arises when you’re joyful. | T: It is natural that rapture arises in one who is joyful.
an10.2:1.10 | S: When your mind is full of rapture you need not make a wish: | T: (5) “For one with a rapturous mind no volition need be exerted:
an10.2:1.11 | S: ‘May my body become tranquil!’ | T: ‘Let my body be tranquil.’
an10.2:1.12 | S: It’s only natural that your body becomes tranquil when your mind is full of rapture. | T: It is natural that the body of one with a rapturous mind is tranquil.
an10.2:1.13 | S: When your body is tranquil you need not make a wish: | T: (6) “For one tranquil in body no volition need be exerted:
an10.2:1.14 | S: ‘May I feel bliss!’ | T: ‘Let me feel pleasure.’
an10.2:1.15 | S: It’s only natural to feel bliss when your body is tranquil. | T: It is natural that one tranquil in body feels pleasure.
an10.2:1.16 | S: When you feel bliss you need not make a wish: | T: (7) “For one feeling pleasure no volition need be exerted:
an10.2:1.17 | S: ‘May my mind be immersed in samādhi!’ | T: ‘Let my mind be concentrated.’
an10.2:1.18 | S: It’s only natural for the mind to be immersed in samādhi when you feel bliss. | T: It is natural that the mind of one feeling pleasure is concentrated.
an10.2:1.19 | S: When your mind is immersed in samādhi you need not make a wish: | T: (8) “For one who is concentrated no volition need be exerted:
an10.2:1.20 | S: ‘May I truly know and see!’ | T: ‘Let me know and see things as they really are.’
an10.2:1.21 | S: It’s only natural to truly know and see when your mind is immersed in samādhi. | T: It is natural that one who is concentrated knows and sees things as they really are.
an10.2:1.22 | S: When you truly know and see you need not make a wish: | T: (9) “For one who knows and sees things as they really are no volition need be exerted:
an10.2:1.23 | S: ‘May I become disillusioned and dispassionate!’ | T: ‘Let me be disenchanted and dispassionate.’
an10.2:1.24 | S: It’s only natural to become disillusioned and dispassionate when you truly know and see. | T: It is natural that one who knows and sees things as they really are is disenchanted and dispassionate.
an10.2:1.25 | S: When you’re disillusioned and dispassionate you need not make a wish: | T: (10) “For one who is disenchanted and dispassionate no volition need be exerted:
an10.2:1.26 | S: ‘May I realize the knowledge and vision of freedom!’ | T: ‘Let me realize the knowledge and vision of liberation.’
an10.2:1.27 | S: It’s only natural to realize the knowledge and vision of freedom when you’re disillusioned and dispassionate. | T: It is natural that one who is disenchanted and dispassionate realizes the knowledge and vision of liberation.
an10.2:2.1 | S: And so, mendicants, the knowledge and vision of freedom is the goal and benefit of disillusionment and dispassion. | T: “Thus, bhikkhus, (9)–(10) the knowledge and vision of liberation is the purpose and benefit of disenchantment and dispassion;
an10.2:2.2 | S: Disillusionment and dispassion is the goal and benefit of truly knowing and seeing. | T: (8) disenchantment and dispassion are the purpose and benefit of the knowledge and vision of things as they really are;
an10.2:2.3 | S: Truly knowing and seeing is the goal and benefit of immersion. | T: (7) the knowledge and vision of things as they really are is the purpose and benefit of concentration;
an10.2:2.4 | S: Immersion is the goal and benefit of bliss. | T: (6) concentration is the purpose and benefit of pleasure;
an10.2:2.5 | S: Bliss is the goal and benefit of tranquility. | T: (5) pleasure is the purpose and benefit of tranquility;
an10.2:2.6 | S: Tranquility is the goal and benefit of rapture. | T: (4) tranquility is the purpose and benefit of rapture;
an10.2:2.7 | S: Rapture is the goal and benefit of joy. | T: (3) rapture is the purpose and benefit of joy;
an10.2:2.8 | S: Joy is the goal and benefit of not having regrets. | T: (2) joy is the purpose and benefit of non-regret;
an10.2:2.9 | S: Not having regrets is the goal and benefit of skillful ethics. | T: and (1) non-regret is the purpose and benefit of virtuous behavior.
an10.2:2.10 | S: And so, mendicants, good qualities flow on and fill up from one to the other, for going from the near shore to the far shore.” | T: “Thus, bhikkhus, one stage flows into the next stage, one stage fills up the next stage, for going from the near shore to the far shore.”
an10.2:2.11 | P: Dutiyaṁ. | T: (none)

## an10.30
an10.30:1.1 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
an10.30:1.2 | S: Now at that time King Pasenadi of Kosala returned from combat after winning a battle and succeeding in his strategy. | T: Now on that occasion King Pasenadi of Kosala had returned from the war front, victorious in battle, his purpose having been achieved.
an10.30:1.3 | S: Then King Pasenadi of Kosala went to the monastery. | T: Then King Pasenadi of Kosala set out for the park.
an10.30:1.4 | S: He went by carriage as far as the terrain allowed, then descended and entered the monastery on foot. | T: He went by carriage as far as the ground was suitable for a carriage, and then he dismounted from his carriage and entered the park on foot.
an10.30:1.5 | S: At that time several mendicants were walking mindfully in the open air. | T: Now on that occasion a number of bhikkhus were walking back and forth in the open air.
an10.30:1.6 | S: Then King Pasenadi of Kosala went up to them and said, | T: Then King Pasenadi of Kosala approached those bhikkhus and asked them:
an10.30:1.7 | S: “Sirs, where is the Blessed One at present, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha? | T: “Bhante, where is the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One now dwelling?
an10.30:1.8 | S: For I want to see the Buddha.” | T: For I wish to see the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.”
an10.30:1.9 | S: “Great king, that’s his dwelling, with the door closed. Approach it quietly, without hurrying; go onto the porch, clear your throat, and knock on the door-panel. The Buddha will open the door.” | T: “Great king, that is his dwelling with the closed door. Approach it quietly. Without hurrying, enter the porch, clear your throat, and tap on the bolt. The Blessed One will open the door for you.”
an10.30:2.1 | S: So the king approached the Buddha’s dwelling, cleared his throat and knocked on the door-panel, and the Buddha opened the door. | T: Then, King Pasenadi of Kosala went quietly up to the dwelling with the closed door. Without hurrying, he entered the porch, cleared his throat, and tapped on the bolt. The Blessed One opened the door.
an10.30:2.2 | S: Then King Pasenadi entered the Buddha’s dwelling. He bowed with his head to the Buddha’s feet, caressing them and covering them with kisses, and pronounced his name: | T: Then King Pasenadi of Kosala entered the dwelling, prostrated himself with his head at the Blessed One’s feet, and covered the Blessed One’s feet with kisses and caressed them with his hands, pronouncing his name:
an10.30:2.3 | S: “Sir, I am Pasenadi, king of Kosala! | T: “Bhante, I am King Pasenadi of Kosala!
an10.30:2.4 | S: I am Pasenadi, king of Kosala!” | T: Bhante, I am King Pasenadi of Kosala!”
an10.30:3.1 | S: “But, Great King, for what reason do you act with such utmost deference for this body, conveying your manifest love?” | T: “But, great king, what reasons do you have for showing such supreme honor to this body and displaying such an offering of loving-kindness?”
an10.30:3.2 | S: “Sir, it’s because of my gratitude and thanks for the Buddha that I act with such utmost deference, conveying my manifest love. | T: “Bhante, it is out of my gratitude and thankfulness that I show such supreme honor toward the Blessed One and display such an offering of loving-kindness to him.
an10.30:4.1 | S: The Buddha is practicing for the welfare and happiness of the people. He has established many people in the noble system, that is, the principles of goodness and skillfulness. | T: (1) “For, Bhante, the Blessed One is practicing for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people; he has established many people in the noble method, that is, in the way of the good Dhamma, in the way of the wholesome Dhamma.
an10.30:4.2 | S: This is a reason that I act with such utmost deference for the Buddha, conveying my manifest love. | T: This is one reason I show such supreme honor toward the Blessed One and display such an offering of loving-kindness to him.
an10.30:5.1 | S: Furthermore, the Buddha is ethical, possessing ethical conduct that is mature, noble, and skillful. | T: (2) “Again, Bhante, the Blessed One is virtuous, of mature behavior, of noble behavior, of wholesome behavior, possessing wholesome behavior.
an10.30:5.2 | S: This is another reason that I act with such utmost deference for the Buddha, conveying my manifest love. | T: This is another reason I show such supreme honor toward the Blessed One….
an10.30:6.1 | S: Furthermore, the Buddha lives in the wilderness, frequenting remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. | T: (3) “Again, Bhante, for a long time the Blessed One has been a forest-dweller who resorts to remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves.
an10.30:6.2 | S: This is another reason that I act with such utmost deference for the Buddha, conveying my manifest love. | T: Since that is so, this is another reason I show such supreme honor toward the Blessed One….
an10.30:7.1 | S: Furthermore, the Buddha is content with any kind of robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. | T: (4) “Again, Bhante, the Blessed One is content with any kind of robe, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and provisions for the sick.
an10.30:7.2 | S: This is another reason that I act with such utmost deference for the Buddha, conveying my manifest love. | T: This is another reason I show such supreme honor toward the Blessed One….
an10.30:8.1 | S: Furthermore, the Buddha is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with cupped palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world. | T: (5) “Again, Bhante, the Blessed One is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
an10.30:8.2 | S: This is another reason that I act with such utmost deference for the Buddha, conveying my manifest love. | T: This is another reason I show such supreme honor toward the Blessed One….
an10.30:9.1 | S: Furthermore, the Buddha gets to take part in talk about self-effacement that helps open the heart, when he wants, without trouble or difficulty. That is, talk about fewness of wishes, contentment, seclusion, aloofness, arousing energy, ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision of freedom. | T: (6) “Again, Bhante, the Blessed One gets to hear at will, without trouble or difficulty, talk concerned with the austere life that leads to the elimination of defilements, that is conducive to opening up the heart, that is, talk on fewness of desires, on contentment, on solitude, on not getting bound up with others, on arousing energy, on virtuous behavior, on concentration, on wisdom, on liberation, on the knowledge and vision of liberation.
an10.30:9.2 | S: This is another reason that I act with such utmost deference for the Buddha, conveying my manifest love. | T: This is another reason I show such supreme honor toward the Blessed One….
an10.30:10.1 | S: Furthermore, the Buddha gets the four absorptions—blissful meditations in this life that belong to the higher mind—when he wants, without trouble or difficulty. | T: (7) “Again, Bhante, the Blessed One gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life.
an10.30:10.2 | S: This is another reason that I act with such utmost deference for the Buddha, conveying my manifest love. | T: This is another reason I show such supreme honor toward the Blessed One….
an10.30:11.1 | S: Furthermore, the Buddha recollects many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. He remembers: ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ And so he recollects his many kinds of past lives, with features and details. | T: (8) “Again, Bhante, the Blessed One recollects his manifold past abodes, that is, one birth, two births, three births, four births, five births, ten births, twenty births, thirty births, forty births, fifty births, a hundred births, a thousand births, a hundred thousand births, many eons of world-dissolution, many eons of world-evolution, many eons of world-dissolution and world-evolution thus: ‘There I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life span; passing away from there, I was reborn elsewhere, and there too I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life span; passing away from there, I was reborn here.’ Thus he recollects his manifold past abodes with their aspects and details.
an10.30:11.2 | S: This is another reason that I act with such utmost deference for the Buddha, conveying my manifest love. | T: Since that is so, this is another reason I show such supreme honor toward the Blessed One….
an10.30:12.1 | S: Furthermore, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, the Buddha sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. He understands how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. ‘These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’ He understands how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. | T: (9) “Again, Bhante, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, the Blessed One sees beings passing away and being reborn, inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and he understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma thus: ‘These beings who engaged in misconduct by body, speech, and mind, who reviled the noble ones, held wrong view, and undertook kamma based on wrong view, with the breakup of the body, after death, have been reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell; but these beings who engaged in good conduct by body, speech, and mind, who did not revile the noble ones, who held right view, and undertook kamma based on right view, with the breakup of the body, after death, have been reborn in a good destination, in the heavenly world.’ Thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, he sees beings passing away and being reborn, inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and he understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma.
an10.30:12.2 | S: This is another reason that I act with such utmost deference for the Buddha, conveying my manifest love. | T: Since that is so, this is another reason I show such supreme honor toward the Blessed One….
an10.30:13.1 | S: Furthermore, the Buddha has realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, and lives having realized it with his own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements. | T: (10) “Again, Bhante, with the destruction of the taints, the Blessed One has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
an10.30:13.2 | S: This is another reason that I act with such utmost deference for the Buddha, conveying my manifest love. | T: Since that is so, this is another reason I show such supreme honor toward the Blessed One and display such an offering of loving-kindness to him.
an10.30:14.1 | S: Well, now, sir, I must go. | T: “And now, Bhante, we must be going.
an10.30:14.2 | S: I have many duties, and much to do.” | T: We are busy and have much to do.”
an10.30:14.3 | S: “Please, Great King, go at your convenience.” | T: “You may go, great king, at your own convenience.”
an10.30:14.4 | S: Then King Pasenadi rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving. | T: Then King Pasenadi of Kosala rose from his seat, paid homage to the Blessed One, circumambulated him keeping the right side toward him, and departed.
an10.30:14.5 | P: Dasamaṁ. | T: (none)
an10.30:14.6 | P: Mahāvaggo tatiyo. | T: (none)
an10.30:15.0 | P: Tassuddānaṁ | T: (none)
an10.30:15.1 | P: Sīhādhivutti kāyena, | T: (none)
an10.30:15.2 | P: cundena kasiṇena ca; | T: (none)
an10.30:15.3 | P: Kāḷī ca dve mahāpañhā, | T: (none)
an10.30:15.4 | P: kosalehi pare duveti. | T: (none)

## an10.31
an10.31:1.1 | S: Then Venerable Upāli went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: | T: Then the Venerable Upāli approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and said to him:
an10.31:1.2 | S: “Sir, for how many reasons did the Realized One lay down training rules for his disciples and recite the monastic code?” | T: “Bhante, on how many grounds has the Tathāgata prescribed the training rules for his disciples and recited the Pātimokkha?”
an10.31:2.1 | S: “Upāli, the Realized One laid down training rules for his disciples and recited the monastic code for ten reasons. | T: “It is, Upāli, on ten grounds that the Tathāgata has prescribed the training rules for his disciples and recited the Pātimokkha.
an10.31:2.2 | S: What ten? | T: What ten?
an10.31:2.3 | S: For the well-being of the Saṅgha and for the comfort of the Saṅgha. For keeping difficult individuals in check and for the comfort of good-hearted mendicants. For restraining defilements that affect this life and protecting against defilements that affect lives to come. For inspiring confidence in those without it, and increasing confidence in those who have it. For the continuation of the true teaching and the support of the training. | T: (1) For the well-being of the Saṅgha; (2) for the ease of the Saṅgha; (3) for keeping recalcitrant persons in check; (4) so that well-behaved bhikkhus can dwell at ease; (5) for the restraint of taints pertaining to this present life; (6) for the dispelling of taints pertaining to future lives; (7) so that those without confidence might gain confidence; and (8) for increasing the confidence of those with confidence; (9) for the continuation of the good Dhamma; and (10) for promoting discipline.
an10.31:2.4 | S: The Realized One laid down training rules for his disciples and recited the monastic code for these ten reasons.” | T: “It is on these ten grounds that the Tathāgata has prescribed the training rules for his disciples and recited the Pātimokkha.”
an10.31:2.5 | P: Paṭhamaṁ. | T: (none)

## an10.32
an10.32:1.1 | S: “Sir, how many grounds are there to suspend the recitation of the monastic code?” | T: “Bhante, how many reasons are there for suspending the Pātimokkha?”
an10.32:1.2 | S: “Upāli, there are ten grounds to suspend the recitation of the monastic code. | T: “There are, Upāli, ten reasons for suspending the Pātimokkha.
an10.32:1.3 | S: What ten? | T: What ten?
an10.32:1.4 | S: A mendicant who has committed an expulsion offense is sitting in the assembly. A discussion about whether someone has committed an expulsion offense is unfinished. Someone who is not fully ordained is sitting in the assembly. A discussion about whether someone is fully ordained or not is unfinished. Someone who has resigned the training is sitting in the assembly. A discussion about whether someone has resigned the training or not is unfinished. A eunuch is sitting in the assembly. A discussion about whether someone is a eunuch is unfinished. A raper of nuns is sitting in the assembly. A discussion about whether or not someone is a raper of nuns is unfinished. | T: (1) One who has committed a pārājika is sitting in that assembly; (2) a discussion about one who has committed a pārājika is underway; (3) one not fully ordained is sitting in that assembly; (4) a discussion about one not fully ordained is underway; (5) one who has given up the training is sitting in that assembly; (6) a discussion about one who has given up the training is underway; (7) a eunuch is sitting in that assembly; (8) a discussion about a eunuch is underway; (9) a seducer of a bhikkhunī is sitting in that assembly; (10) a discussion about a seducer of a bhikkhunī is underway.
an10.32:1.5 | S: These are the ten grounds to suspend the recitation of the monastic code.” | T: These are the ten reasons for suspending the Pātimokkha.”
an10.32:1.6 | P: Dutiyaṁ. | T: (none)

## an10.33
an10.33:1.1 | S: “Sir, how many qualities should a mendicant have to be deemed a judge?” | T: “Bhante, how many qualities should a bhikkhu possess to be agreed upon to adjudicate in a disciplinary issue?”
an10.33:1.2 | S: “Upāli, a mendicant should have ten qualities to be deemed a judge. | T: “A bhikkhu who possesses ten qualities, Upāli, may be agreed upon to adjudicate in a disciplinary issue.
an10.33:1.3 | S: What ten? | T: What ten?
an10.33:1.4 | S: It’s when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. | T: (1) Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults. Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
an10.33:1.5 | S: They’re very learned, remembering and keeping what they’ve learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and penetrating them theoretically. | T: (2) He has learned much, remembers what he has learned, and accumulates what he has learned. Those teachings that are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing, which proclaim the perfectly complete and pure spiritual life—such teachings as these he has learned much of, retained in mind, recited verbally, investigated mentally, and penetrated well by view.
an10.33:1.6 | S: Both monastic codes have been passed down to them in detail, well analyzed, well mastered, well evaluated in both the rules and accompanying material. | T: (3) Both Pātimokkhas have been well transmitted to him in detail, well analyzed, well mastered, well determined in terms of the rules and their detailed explication.
an10.33:1.7 | S: They’re firm and unfaltering in the training. | T: (4) He is firm in the discipline, immovable.
an10.33:1.8 | S: When there are opposing parties, they’re able to persuade, advocate, and convince them, make them see the other side and trust each other. | T: (5) He is able to convince those on both sides of the issue, to describe matters to them, to persuade them, to demonstrate to them, and to placate them.
an10.33:1.9 | S: They’re skilled in the instigation and settlement of disciplinary issues. | T: (6) He is skilled in the origination and settlement of disciplinary issues.
an10.33:1.10 | S: They know what a disciplinary issue is. | T: (7) He knows what a disciplinary issue is.
an10.33:1.11 | S: They know how a disciplinary issue originates. | T: (8) He knows the origin of a disciplinary issue.
an10.33:1.12 | S: They know how a disciplinary issue ceases. | T: (9) He knows the cessation of a disciplinary issue.
an10.33:1.13 | S: They know the practical way leading to the cessation of a disciplinary issue. | T: (10) He knows the way leading to the cessation of a disciplinary issue.
an10.33:1.14 | S: A mendicant should possess these ten qualities to be deemed a judge.” | T: A bhikkhu who possesses these ten qualities may be agreed upon to adjudicate in a disciplinary issue.”
an10.33:1.15 | P: Tatiyaṁ. | T: (none)

## an10.34
an10.34:1.1 | S: “Sir, how many qualities should a mendicant have to give ordination?” | T: “Bhante, how many qualities should a bhikkhu possess to give full ordination?”
an10.34:1.2 | S: “Upāli, a mendicant should have ten qualities to give ordination. | T: “A bhikkhu who possesses ten qualities, Upāli, may give full ordination.
an10.34:1.3 | S: What ten? | T: What ten?
an10.34:1.4 | S: It’s when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. | T: (1) Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous … he trains in them.
an10.34:1.5 | S: They’re very learned, remembering and keeping what they’ve learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and penetrating them theoretically. | T: (2) He has learned much … and penetrated well by view.
an10.34:1.6 | S: Both monastic codes have been passed down to them in detail, well analyzed, well mastered, well evaluated in both the rules and accompanying material. | T: (3) Both Pātimokkhas have been well transmitted to him in detail, well analyzed, well mastered, well determined in terms of the rules and their detailed explication.
an10.34:1.7 | S: They’re able to care for the sick or get someone else to do so. | T: (4) He is able to look after a patient or to get someone else to look after him.
an10.34:1.8 | S: They’re able to settle dissatisfaction or get someone else to do so. | T: (5) He is able to eliminate one’s dissatisfaction or to get someone else to eliminate it.
an10.34:1.9 | S: They’re able to dispel remorse when it has come up. | T: (6) He is able to use the Dhamma to dispel regrets that might arise in his pupils.
an10.34:1.10 | S: They’re able to rationally dissuade someone from misconceptions that come up. | T: (7) He is able to dissuade them, by way of the Dhamma, from erroneous views that have arisen.
an10.34:1.11 | S: They’re able to encourage someone in the higher ethics, | T: (8) He is able to encourage them in the higher virtuous behavior.
an10.34:1.12 | S: the higher mind, | T: (9) He is able to encourage them in the higher mind.
an10.34:1.13 | S: and the higher wisdom. | T: (10) He is able to encourage them in the higher wisdom.
an10.34:1.14 | S: A mendicant should possess these ten qualities to give ordination.” | T: A bhikkhu who possesses these ten qualities may give full ordination.”
an10.34:1.15 | P: Catutthaṁ. | T: (none)

## an10.37
an10.37:1.1 | S: “Sir, they speak of ‘schism in the Saṅgha’. | T: “Bhante, it is said: ‘Schism in the Saṅgha, schism in the Saṅgha.’
an10.37:1.2 | S: How is schism in the Saṅgha defined?” | T: How, Bhante, is there schism in the Saṅgha?”
an10.37:1.3 | S: “Upāli, it’s when a mendicant explains what is not the teaching as the teaching, and what is the teaching as not the teaching. They explain what is not the training as the training, and what is the training as not the training. They explain what was not spoken and stated by the Realized One as spoken and stated by the Realized One, and what was spoken and stated by the Realized One as not spoken and stated by the Realized One. They explain what was not practiced by the Realized One as practiced by the Realized One, and what was practiced by the Realized One as not practiced by the Realized One. They explain what was not prescribed by the Realized One as prescribed by the Realized One, and what was prescribed by the Realized One as not prescribed by the Realized One. | T: “Here, Upāli, (1) bhikkhus explain non-Dhamma as Dhamma, (2) and Dhamma as non-Dhamma. (3) They explain non-discipline as discipline, and (4) discipline as non-discipline. (5) They explain what has not been stated and uttered by the Tathāgata as having been stated and uttered by him, and (6) what has been stated and uttered by the Tathāgata as not having been stated and uttered by him. (7) They explain what has not been practiced by the Tathāgata as having been practiced by him, and (8) what has been practiced by the Tathāgata as not having been practiced by him. (9) They explain what has not been prescribed by the Tathāgata as having been prescribed by him, and (10) what has been prescribed by the Tathāgata as not having been prescribed by him.
an10.37:1.4 | S: On these ten grounds they split off and go their own way. They perform legal acts autonomously and recite the monastic code autonomously. | T: On these ten grounds they withdraw and go apart. They perform legal acts separately and recite the Pātimokkha separately.
an10.37:1.5 | S: That is how schism in the Saṅgha is defined.” | T: It is in this way, Upāli, that there is schism in the Saṅgha.”
an10.37:1.6 | P: Sattamaṁ. | T: (none)

## an10.38
an10.38:1.1 | S: “Sir, they speak of ‘harmony in the Saṅgha’. | T: “Bhante, it is said: ‘Concord in the Saṅgha, concord in the Saṅgha.’
an10.38:1.2 | S: How is harmony in the Saṅgha defined?” | T: How is there concord in the Saṅgha?”
an10.38:1.3 | S: “Upāli, it’s when a mendicant explains what is not the teaching as not the teaching, and what is the teaching as the teaching. They explain what is not the training as not the training, and what is the training as the training. They explain what was not spoken and stated by the Realized One as not spoken and stated by the Realized One, and what was spoken and stated by the Realized One as spoken and stated by the Realized One. They explain what was not practiced by the Realized One as not practiced by the Realized One, and what was practiced by the Realized One as practiced by the Realized One. They explain what was not prescribed by the Realized One as not prescribed by the Realized One, and what was prescribed by the Realized One as prescribed by the Realized One. | T: “Here, Upāli, (1) bhikkhus explain non-Dhamma as non-Dhamma, and (2) Dhamma as Dhamma. (3) They explain non-discipline as non-discipline, and (4) discipline as discipline. (5) They explain what has not been stated and uttered by the Tathāgata as not having been stated and uttered by him, and (6) what has been stated and uttered by the Tathāgata as having been stated and uttered by him. (7) They explain what has not been practiced by the Tathāgata as not having been practiced by him, and (8) what has been practiced by the Tathāgata as having been practiced by him. (9) They explain what has not been prescribed by the Tathāgata as not having been prescribed by him, and (10) what has been prescribed by the Tathāgata as having been prescribed by him.
an10.38:1.4 | S: On these ten grounds they don’t split off and go their own way. They don’t perform legal acts autonomously or recite the monastic code autonomously. | T: On these ten grounds, they do not withdraw and go apart. They do not perform legal acts separately or recite the Pātimokkha separately.
an10.38:1.5 | S: That is how harmony in the Saṅgha is defined.” | T: It is in this way, Upāli, that there is concord in the Saṅgha.”
an10.38:1.6 | P: Aṭṭhamaṁ. | T: (none)

## an10.3
an10.3:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a vital condition for having no regrets. | T: “Bhikkhus, (1) for an immoral person, for one deficient in virtuous behavior, (2) non-regret lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:1.2 | S: When there are regrets, one who has regrets has destroyed a vital condition for joy. | T: When there is no non-regret, for one deficient in non-regret, (3) joy lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:1.3 | S: When there is no joy, one who lacks joy has destroyed a vital condition for rapture. | T: When there is no joy, for one deficient in joy, (4) rapture lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:1.4 | S: When there is no rapture, one who lacks rapture has destroyed a vital condition for tranquility. | T: When there is no rapture, for one deficient in rapture, (5) tranquility lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:1.5 | S: When there is no tranquility, one who lacks tranquility has destroyed a vital condition for bliss. | T: When there is no tranquility, for one deficient in tranquility, (6) pleasure lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:1.6 | S: When there is no bliss, one who lacks bliss has destroyed a vital condition for right immersion. | T: When there is no pleasure, for one deficient in pleasure, (7) right concentration lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:1.7 | S: When there is no right immersion, one who lacks right immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true knowledge and vision. | T: When there is no right concentration, for one deficient in right concentration, (8) the knowledge and vision of things as they really are lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:1.8 | S: When there is no true knowledge and vision, one who lacks true knowledge and vision has destroyed a vital condition for disillusionment and dispassion. | T: When there is no knowledge and vision of things as they really are, for one deficient in the knowledge and vision of things as they really are, (9) disenchantment and dispassion lack their proximate cause.
an10.3:1.9 | S: When there is no disillusionment and dispassion, one who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom. | T: When there is no disenchantment and dispassion, for one deficient in disenchantment and dispassion, (10) the knowledge and vision of liberation lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:1.10 | S: Suppose there was a tree that lacked branches and foliage. Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would not grow to fullness. | T: “Suppose there is a tree deficient in branches and foliage. Then its shoots do not grow to fullness; also its bark, softwood, and heartwood do not grow to fullness.
an10.3:1.11 | S: In the same way, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a vital condition for having no regrets. | T: So too, for an immoral person, one deficient in virtuous behavior, non-regret lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:1.12 | S: When there are regrets, one who has regrets has destroyed a vital condition for joy. … | T: When there is no non-regret …
an10.3:1.13 | S: One who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom. | T: the knowledge and vision of liberation lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.1 | S: An ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital condition for not having regrets. | T: “Bhikkhus, (1) for a virtuous person, for one whose behavior is virtuous, (2) non-regret possesses its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.2 | S: When there are no regrets, one who has no regrets has fulfilled a vital condition for joy. | T: When there is non-regret, for one possessing non-regret, (3) joy possesses its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.3 | S: When there is joy, one who has fulfilled joy has fulfilled a vital condition for rapture. | T: When there is joy, for one possessing joy, (4) rapture possesses its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.4 | S: When there is rapture, one who has fulfilled rapture has fulfilled a vital condition for tranquility. | T: When there is rapture, for one possessing rapture, (5) tranquility possesses its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.5 | S: When there is tranquility, one who has fulfilled tranquility has fulfilled a vital condition for bliss. | T: When there is tranquility, for one possessing tranquility, (6) pleasure possesses its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.6 | S: When there is bliss, one who has fulfilled bliss has fulfilled a vital condition for right immersion. | T: When there is pleasure, for one possessing pleasure, (7) right concentration possesses its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.7 | S: When there is right immersion, one who has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital condition for true knowledge and vision. | T: When there is right concentration, for one possessing right concentration, (8) the knowledge and vision of things as they really are possesses its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.8 | S: When there is true knowledge and vision, one who has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has fulfilled a vital condition for disillusionment and dispassion. | T: When there is the knowledge and vision of things as they really are, for one possessing the knowledge and vision of things as they really are, (9) disenchantment and dispassion possess their proximate cause.
an10.3:2.9 | S: When there is disillusionment and dispassion, one who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom. | T: When there is disenchantment and dispassion, for one possessing disenchantment and dispassion, (10) the knowledge and vision of liberation possesses its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.10 | S: Suppose there was a tree that was complete with branches and foliage. Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would grow to fullness. | T: “Suppose there is a tree possessing branches and foliage. Then its shoots grow to fullness; also its bark, softwood, and heartwood grow to fullness.
an10.3:2.11 | S: In the same way, an ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital condition for not having regrets. | T: So too, for a virtuous person, one whose behavior is virtuous, non-regret possesses its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.12 | S: When there are no regrets, one who has no regrets has fulfilled a vital condition for joy. … | T: When there is non-regret …
an10.3:2.13 | S: One who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.” | T: the knowledge and vision of liberation possesses its proximate cause.”
an10.3:2.14 | P: Tatiyaṁ. | T: (none)

## an10.40
an10.40:1.1 | S: “Sir, they speak of ‘harmony in the Saṅgha’. | T: “Bhante, it is said: ‘Concord in the Saṅgha, concord in the Saṅgha.’
an10.40:1.2 | S: How is harmony in the Saṅgha defined?” | T: How is there concord in the Saṅgha?”
an10.40:1.3 | S: “Ānanda, it’s when a mendicant explains what is not the teaching as not the teaching, and what is the teaching as the teaching. They explain what is not the training as not the training, and what is the training as the training. They explain what was not spoken and stated by the Realized One as not spoken and stated by the Realized One, and what was spoken and stated by the Realized One as spoken and stated by the Realized One. They explain what was not practiced by the Realized One as not practiced by the Realized One, and what was practiced by the Realized One as practiced by the Realized One. They explain what was not prescribed by the Realized One as not prescribed by the Realized One, and what was prescribed by the Realized One as prescribed by the Realized One. | T: “Here, Ānanda, (1) bhikkhus explain non-Dhamma as non-Dhamma … as in AN10.38 … and (10) what has been prescribed by the Tathāgata as having been prescribed by him.
an10.40:1.4 | S: On these ten grounds they don’t split off and go their own way. They don’t perform legal acts autonomously or recite the monastic code autonomously. | T: On these ten grounds they do not withdraw and go apart. They do not perform legal acts separately or recite the Pātimokkha separately.
an10.40:1.5 | S: That is how harmony in the Saṅgha is defined.” | T: It is in this way, Ānanda, that there is concord in the Saṅgha.”
an10.40:2.1 | S: “But sir, what does someone who has forged harmony in a schismatic Saṅgha brim with?” | T: “But, Bhante, when one reconciles a divided Saṅgha, what does one generate?”
an10.40:2.2 | S: “They brim with divine merit.” | T: “One generates divine merit, Ānanda.”
an10.40:2.3 | S: “But what is divine merit?” | T: “But, Bhante, what is divine merit?”
an10.40:2.4 | S: “They rejoice in heaven for an eon, Ānanda. | T: “One rejoices in heaven for an eon, Ānanda.”
an10.40:3.1 | S: A Saṅgha in harmony is happy, | T: Pleasant is concord in the Saṅgha,
an10.40:3.2 | S: as is support for those in harmony. | T: and the mutual help of those who live in concord.
an10.40:3.3 | S: Taking a stand on the teaching, | T: Delighting in concord, established in Dhamma,
an10.40:3.4 | S: favoring harmony, they ruin no sanctuary. | T: one does not fall away from security from bondage.
an10.40:3.5 | S: After forging harmony in the Saṅgha, | T: Having brought concord to the Saṅgha,
an10.40:3.6 | S: they rejoice in heaven for an eon.” | T: one rejoices in heaven for an eon.
an10.40:3.7 | P: Dasamaṁ. | T: (none)
an10.40:3.8 | P: Upālivaggo catuttho. | T: (none)
an10.40:4.0 | P: Tassuddānaṁ | T: (none)
an10.40:4.1 | P: Upāli ṭhapanā ubbāho, | T: (none)
an10.40:4.2 | P: upasampadanissayā; | T: (none)
an10.40:4.3 | P: Sāmaṇero ca dve bhedā, | T: (none)
an10.40:4.4 | P: ānandehi pare duveti. | T: (none)

## an10.51
an10.51:1.1 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
an10.51:1.2 | S: There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, | T: There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus:
an10.51:1.3 | S: “Mendicants!” | T: “Bhikkhus!”
an10.51:1.4 | S: “Venerable sir,” they replied. | T: “Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
an10.51:1.5 | S: The Buddha said this: | T: The Blessed One said this:
an10.51:2.1 | S: “Mendicants, if a mendicant isn’t skilled in encompassing another’s mind, then they should train themselves: ‘I will be skilled in encompassing my own mind.’ | T: “Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who is not skilled in the ways of others’ minds should train: ‘I will be skilled in the ways of my own mind.’
an10.51:2.2 | P: evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabbaṁ. | T: It is in this way that you should train yourselves.
an10.51:3.1 | S: And how is a mendicant skilled in encompassing their own mind? | T: “And how is a bhikkhu skilled in the ways of his own mind?
an10.51:3.2 | S: Suppose there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of adornments, and they check their own reflection in a clean bright mirror or a clear bowl of water. If they see any dirt or blemish there, they’d try to remove it. | T: It is just as if a woman or a man—young, youthful, and fond of ornaments—would look at her or his own facial reflection in a clean bright mirror or in a bowl of clear water. If they see any dust or blemish there, they will make an effort to remove it.
an10.51:3.3 | S: But if they don’t see any dirt or blemish there, they’re happy with that, as they’ve got all they wished for: | T: But if they do not see any dust or blemish there, they will be glad about it; and their wish fulfilled, they will think,
an10.51:3.4 | S: ‘How fortunate that I’m clean!’ | T: ‘How fortunate that I’m clean!’
an10.51:3.5 | S: In the same way, checking is very helpful for a mendicant’s skillful qualities. | T: So too, self-examination is very helpful for a bhikkhu to grow in wholesome qualities.
an10.51:3.6 | S: ‘Am I often covetous or not? Am I often malicious or not? Am I often overcome with dullness and drowsiness or not? Am I often restless or not? Am I often doubtful or not? Am I often irritable or not? Am I often corrupted in mind or not? Am I often disturbed in body or not? Am I often energetic or not? Am I often immersed in samādhi or not?’ | T: “One should ask oneself: (1) ‘Am I often given to longing or without longing? (2) Am I often given to ill will or without ill will? (3) Am I often overcome by dullness and drowsiness or free from dullness and drowsiness? (4) Am I often restless or calm? (5) Am I often plagued by doubt or free from doubt? (6) Am I often angry or without anger? (7) Is my mind often defiled or undefiled? (8) Is my body often agitated or unagitated? (9) Am I often lazy or energetic? (10) Am I often unconcentrated or concentrated?’
an10.51:4.1 | S: Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this: | T: “If, by such self-examination, a bhikkhu knows:
an10.51:4.2 | S: ‘I am often covetous, malicious, overcome with dullness and drowsiness, restless, doubtful, irritable, corrupted in mind, disturbed in body, lazy, and not immersed in samādhi.’ In order to give up those bad, unskillful qualities, they should apply extraordinary enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness. | T: ‘I am often given to longing, given to ill will, overcome by dullness and drowsiness, restless, plagued by doubt, angry, defiled in mind, agitated in body, lazy, and unconcentrated,’ he should put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to abandon those same bad unwholesome qualities.
an10.51:4.3 | S: Suppose your clothes or head were on fire. In order to extinguish it, you’d apply extraordinary enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness. | T: Just as one whose clothes or head had caught fire would put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to extinguish the fire on his clothes or head,
an10.51:4.4 | S: In the same way, in order to give up those bad, unskillful qualities, that mendicant should apply extraordinary enthusiasm … | T: so too that bhikkhu should put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to abandon those same bad unwholesome qualities.
an10.51:5.1 | S: But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this: | T: “But if, by such self-examination, a bhikkhu knows:
an10.51:5.2 | S: ‘I am often content, kind-hearted, rid of dullness and drowsiness, calm, confident, loving, pure in mind, undisturbed in body, energetic, and immersed in samādhi.’ Grounded on those skillful qualities, they should practice meditation further to end the defilements.” | T: ‘I am often without longing, without ill will, free from dullness and drowsiness, calm, free from doubt, without anger, undefiled in mind, unagitated in body, energetic, and concentrated,’ he should base himself on those same wholesome qualities and make a further effort to reach the destruction of the taints.”
an10.51:5.3 | P: Paṭhamaṁ. | T: (none)

