## mn60, continued
mn60:19.2 | S: Since action actually does have an effect, their thought that action is effective is right purpose. | T: Because there actually is action, when he is resolved that ‘There is action,’ that is his right resolve.
mn60:19.3 | S: Since action actually does have an effect, their speech that action is effective is right speech. | T: Because there actually is action, when he speaks the statement, ‘There is action,’ that is his right speech. Because there actually is action, when he says that
mn60:19.4 | S: Since action actually does have an effect, in saying that action is effective they don’t contradict those perfected ones who teach that action is effective. | T: ‘There is action,’ he doesn’t make himself an opponent to those arahants who teach action.
mn60:19.5 | S: Since action actually does have an effect, in persuading another that action is effective they are persuading them to accept a true teaching. | T: Because there actually is action, when he persuades another that ‘There is action,’ that is persuasion in what is true Dhamma. And in that persuasion in what is true Dhamma,
mn60:19.6 | S: And on account of that they don’t glorify themselves or put others down. | T: he doesn’t exalt himself or disparage others.
mn60:19.7 | S: So they give up their former unethical conduct and are established in ethical conduct. | T: Whatever bad habituation he previously had is abandoned, while good habituation is manifested.
mn60:19.8 | S: And that is how these many skillful qualities come to be with right view as condition—right view, right purpose, right speech, not contradicting the noble ones, persuading others to accept true teachings, and not glorifying oneself or putting others down. | T: And this right view, right resolve, right speech, non-opposition to the arahants, persuasion in what is true Dhamma, non-exaltation of self, & non-disparagement of others: These many skillful activities come into play, in dependence on right view.
mn60:20.1 | S: A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: | T: B3. “With regard to this, an observant person considers thus:
mn60:20.2 | S: ‘If there is effective action, when this individual’s body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. | T: ‘If there is action, then this venerable person—on the breakup of the body, after death—will reappear in a good destination, a heavenly world.
mn60:20.3 | S: But let us grant that those who say that there is no effective action are correct. | T: Even if we didn’t speak of action, and there weren’t the true statement of those venerable contemplatives & brahmans,
mn60:20.4 | S: Regardless, that individual is still praised by sensible people in this very life as being a moral individual of right view, who affirms the efficacy of action.’ | T: this venerable person is still praised in the here & now by the observant as a person of good habits & right view: one who holds to a doctrine of action.’
mn60:20.5 | S: So if there really is effective action, they hold a winning hand on both counts. | T: If there really is a next world,
mn60:20.6 | S: For they are praised by sensible people in this very life, and when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. | T: then this venerable person has made a good throw twice, in that he is praised by the observant here & now; and in that—with the breakup of the body, after death—he will reappear in a good destination, a heavenly world.
mn60:20.7 | S: They have rightly undertaken this sure bet teaching in such a way that it encompasses the positive outcomes of both sides, leaving out the unskillful premise. | T: Thus this safe-bet teaching, when well grasped & adopted by him, covers both sides, and leaves behind the possibility of the unskillful.
mn60:21.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: | T: Causality & Non-causality A. “There are some contemplatives & brahmans who hold this doctrine, hold this view:
mn60:21.2 | S: ‘There is no cause or reason for the corruption of sentient beings. | T: ‘There is no causality, no requisite condition, for the defilement of beings.
mn60:21.3 | S: Sentient beings are corrupted without cause or reason. | T: Beings are defiled without causality, without requisite condition.
mn60:21.4 | S: There’s no cause or reason for the purification of sentient beings. | T: There is no causality, no requisite condition, for the purification of beings.
mn60:21.5 | S: Sentient beings are purified without cause or reason. | T: Beings are purified without causality, without requisite condition.
mn60:21.6 | S: There is no power, no energy, no human strength or vigor. | T: There is no strength, no effort, no human energy, no human endeavor.
mn60:21.7 | S: All sentient beings, all living creatures, all beings, all souls lack control, power, and energy. Molded by destiny, circumstance, and nature, they experience pleasure and pain in the six classes of rebirth.’ | T: All living beings, all life, all beings, all souls are powerless, devoid of strength, devoid of effort. Subject to the changes of fate, serendipity, and nature, they experience pleasure and pain in the six great classes of birth.’
mn60:22.1 | S: And there are some ascetics and brahmins whose doctrine directly contradicts this. | T: B. “Some contemplatives & brahmans, speaking in direct opposition to those contemplatives & brahmans,
mn60:22.2 | S: They say: | T: say this:
mn60:22.3 | S: ‘There is a cause and reason for the corruption of sentient beings. | T: ‘There is causality, there is requisite condition, for the defilement of beings.
mn60:22.4 | S: Sentient beings are corrupted with cause and reason. | T: Beings are defiled with causality,
mn60:22.5 | S: There is a cause and reason for the purification of sentient beings. | T: with requisite condition. There is causality, there is requisite condition, for the purification of beings.
mn60:22.6 | S: Sentient beings are purified with cause and reason. | T: Beings are purified with causality, with requisite condition.
mn60:22.7 | S: There is power, energy, human strength and vigor. | T: There is strength, there is effort, there is human energy, there is human endeavor.
mn60:22.8 | S: It is not the case that all sentient beings, all living creatures, all beings, all souls lack control, power, and energy, or that, molded by destiny, circumstance, and nature, they experience pleasure and pain in the six classes of rebirth.’ | T: It’s not the case that all living beings, all life, all beings, all souls are powerless, devoid of strength, devoid of effort; or that subject to the changes of fate, serendipity, and nature, they experience pleasure and pain in the six great classes of birth.’
mn60:22.9 | S: What do you think, householders? | T: “What do you think, householders?
mn60:22.10 | S: Don’t these doctrines directly contradict each other?” | T: Don’t these contemplatives & brahmans speak in direct opposition to each other?”
mn60:22.11 | S: “Yes, sir.” | T: “Yes, lord.”
mn60:23.1 | S: “Since this is so, consider those ascetics and brahmins whose view is that | T: A1. “Now, householders, of those contemplatives & brahmans who hold this doctrine, hold this view—
mn60:23.2 | S: there’s no cause or reason for the corruption of sentient beings, etc. | T: ’There is no cause, no requisite condition, for the defilement of beings.…
mn60:23.6 | P: Natthi balaṁ, natthi vīriyaṁ, natthi purisathāmo, natthi purisaparakkamo; sabbe sattā sabbe pāṇā sabbe bhūtā sabbe jīvā avasā abalā avīriyā niyatisaṅgatibhāvapariṇatā chasvevābhijātīsu sukhadukkhaṁ paṭisaṁvedentī’ti | T: Subject to the changes of fate, serendipity, and nature, they experience pleasure and pain in the six great classes of birth’—
mn60:23.7 | S: You can expect that they will shun good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and undertake and implement bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: it can be expected that, shunning these three skillful activities—good bodily conduct, good verbal conduct, good mental conduct—they will adopt & practice these three unskillful activities: bad bodily conduct, bad verbal conduct, bad mental conduct.
mn60:23.8 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn60:23.9 | S: Because those ascetics and brahmins don’t see that unskillful qualities are full of drawbacks, sordidness, and corruption, or that skillful qualities have the benefit and cleansing power of renunciation. | T: Because those venerable contemplatives & brahmans do not see, in unskillful activities, the drawbacks, the degradation, and the defilement; nor in skillful activities the rewards of renunciation, resembling cleansing.
mn60:24.1 | S: Moreover, since there actually is causality, their view that there is no causality is wrong view. | T: A2. “Because there actually is causality, the view of one who thinks, ‘There is no causality’ is his wrong view.
mn60:24.2 | S: Since there actually is causality, their thought that there is no causality is wrong purpose. | T: Because there actually is causality, when he is resolved that ‘There is no causality,’ that is his wrong resolve.
mn60:24.3 | S: Since there actually is causality, their speech that there is no causality is wrong speech. | T: Because there actually is causality, when he speaks the statement, ‘There is no causality,’ that is his wrong speech.
mn60:24.4 | S: Since there actually is causality, in saying that there is no causality they contradict those perfected ones who teach that there is causality. | T: Because there actually is causality, when he says that ‘There is no causality,’ he makes himself an opponent to those arahants who teach causality.
mn60:24.5 | S: Since there actually is causality, in persuading another that there is no causality they are persuading them to accept an untrue teaching. | T: Because there actually is causality, when he persuades another that ‘There is no causality,’ that is persuasion in what is not true Dhamma. And in that persuasion in what is not true Dhamma,
mn60:24.6 | S: And on account of that they glorify themselves and put others down. | T: he exalts himself and disparages others.
mn60:24.7 | S: So they give up their former ethical conduct and are established in unethical conduct. | T: Whatever good habituation he previously had is abandoned,
mn60:24.8 | S: And that is how these many bad, unskillful qualities come to be with wrong view as condition—wrong view, wrong purpose, wrong speech, contradicting the noble ones, persuading others to accept untrue teachings, and glorifying oneself and putting others down. | T: while bad habituation is manifested. And this wrong view, wrong resolve, wrong speech, opposition to the arahants, persuasion in what is not true Dhamma, exaltation of self, & disparagement of others: These many evil, unskillful activities come into play, in dependence on wrong view.
mn60:25.1 | S: A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: | T: A3. “With regard to this, an observant person considers thus:
mn60:25.2 | S: ‘If there is no causality, when this individual’s body breaks up they will keep themselves safe. | T: ‘If there is no causality, then—with the breakup of the body, after death—this venerable person has made himself safe.
mn60:25.3 | S: And if there is causality, when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: But if there is causality, then this venerable person—on the breakup of the body, after death—will reappear in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.
mn60:25.4 | S: But let us grant that those who say that there is no causality are correct. | T: Even if we didn’t speak of causality, and there weren’t the true statement of those venerable contemplatives & brahmans,
mn60:25.5 | S: Regardless, that individual is still criticized by sensible people in this very life as being an immoral individual of wrong view, one who denies causality.’ | T: this venerable person is still criticized in the here & now by the observant as a person of bad habits & wrong view: one who holds to a doctrine of non-causality.’
mn60:25.6 | S: But if there really is causality, they hold a losing hand on both counts. | T: If there really is a next world,
mn60:25.7 | S: For they are criticized by sensible people in this very life, and when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: then this venerable person has made a bad throw twice: in that he is criticized by the observant here & now, and in that—with the breakup of the body, after death—he will reappear in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.
mn60:25.8 | S: They have wrongly undertaken this sure bet teaching in such a way that it encompasses the positive outcomes of one side only, leaving out the skillful premise. | T: Thus this safe-bet teaching, when poorly grasped & poorly adopted by him, covers (only) one side, and leaves behind the possibility of the skillful.
mn60:26.1 | S: Since this is so, consider those ascetics and brahmins whose view is that | T: B1. “Now, householders, of those contemplatives & brahmans who hold this doctrine, hold this view—
mn60:26.2 | S: there is a cause and reason for the corruption of sentient beings, etc. | T: ’There is causality, there is requisite condition, for the defilement of beings.… It’s not the case that all living beings, all life, all beings,
mn60:26.6 | P: Atthi balaṁ, atthi vīriyaṁ, atthi purisathāmo, atthi purisaparakkamo; na sabbe sattā sabbe pāṇā sabbe bhūtā sabbe jīvā avasā abalā avīriyā niyatisaṅgatibhāvapariṇatā chasvevābhijātīsu sukhadukkhaṁ paṭisaṁvedentī’ti | T: all souls are powerless, devoid of strength, devoid of effort; or that subject to the changes of fate, serendipity, and nature, they experience pleasure and pain in the six great classes of birth’—
mn60:26.7 | S: You can expect that they will shun bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and undertake and implement good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: it can be expected that, shunning these three unskillful activities—bad bodily conduct, bad verbal conduct, bad mental conduct—they will adopt & practice these three skillful activities: good bodily conduct, good verbal conduct, good mental conduct.
mn60:26.8 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn60:26.9 | S: Because those ascetics and brahmins see that unskillful qualities are full of drawbacks, sordidness, and corruption, and that skillful qualities have the benefit and cleansing power of renunciation. | T: Because those venerable contemplatives & brahmans see in unskillful activities the drawbacks, the degradation, and the defilement; and in skillful activities the rewards of renunciation, resembling cleansing.
mn60:27.1 | S: Moreover, since there actually is causality, their view that there is causality is right view. | T: B2. “Because there actually is causality, the view of one who thinks, ‘There is causality’ is his right view.
mn60:27.2 | S: Since there actually is causality, their thought that there is causality is right purpose. | T: Because there actually is causality, when he is resolved that ‘There is causality,’ that is his right resolve.
mn60:27.3 | S: Since there actually is causality, their speech that there is causality is right speech. | T: Because there actually is causality, when he speaks the statement, ‘There is causality,’ that is his right speech.
mn60:27.4 | S: Since there actually is causality, in saying that there is causality they don’t contradict those perfected ones who teach that there is causality. | T: Because there actually is causality, when he says that ‘There is causality,’ he doesn’t make himself an opponent to those arahants who teach causality. Because there actually is causality,
mn60:27.5 | S: Since there actually is causality, in persuading another that there is causality they are persuading them to accept a true teaching. | T: when he persuades another that ‘There is causality,’ that is persuasion in what is true Dhamma. And in that persuasion in what is true Dhamma,
mn60:27.6 | S: And on account of that they don’t glorify themselves or put others down. | T: he doesn’t exalt himself or disparage others.
mn60:27.7 | S: So they give up their former unethical conduct and are established in ethical conduct. | T: Whatever bad habituation he previously had is abandoned, while good habituation is manifested.
mn60:27.8 | S: And that is how these many skillful qualities come to be with right view as condition—right view, right purpose, right speech, not contradicting the noble ones, persuading others to accept true teachings, and not glorifying oneself or putting others down. | T: And this right view, right resolve, right speech, non-opposition to the arahants, persuasion in what is true Dhamma, non-exaltation of self, & non-disparagement of others: These many skillful activities come into play, in dependence on right view.
mn60:28.1 | S: A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: ‘If there is causality, when this individual’s body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. | T: B3. “With regard to this, an observant person considers thus: ‘If there is causality, then this venerable person—on the breakup of the body, after death—will reappear in a good destination, a heavenly world.
mn60:28.2 | S: But let us grant that those who say that there is no causality are correct. | T: Even if we didn’t speak of causality, and there weren’t the true statement of those venerable contemplatives & brahmans,
mn60:28.3 | S: Regardless, that individual is still praised by sensible people in this very life as being a moral individual of right view, who affirms causality.’ | T: this venerable person is still praised in the here & now by the observant as a person of good habits & right view: one who holds to a doctrine of causality.’
mn60:28.4 | S: So if there really is causality, they hold a winning hand on both counts. | T: If there really is causality,
mn60:28.5 | S: For they are praised by sensible people in this very life, and when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. | T: then this venerable person has made a good throw twice, in that he is praised by the observant here & now; and in that—with the breakup of the body, after death—he will reappear in a good destination, a heavenly world.
mn60:28.6 | S: They have rightly undertaken this sure bet teaching in such a way that it encompasses the positive outcomes of both sides, leaving out the unskillful premise. | T: Thus this safe-bet teaching, when well grasped & adopted by him, covers both sides, and leaves behind the possibility of the unskillful.
mn60:29.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: | T: Formlessness “There are some contemplatives & brahmans who hold this doctrine, hold this view:
mn60:29.2 | S: ‘There are no totally formless states of meditation.’ | T: ‘There is no total formlessness.’
mn60:30.1 | S: And there are some ascetics and brahmins whose doctrine directly contradicts this. | T: Some contemplatives & brahmans, speaking in direct opposition to those contemplatives & brahmans,
mn60:30.2 | S: They say: | T: say this:
mn60:30.3 | S: ‘There are totally formless states of meditation.’ | T: ‘There is total formlessness.’
mn60:30.4 | S: What do you think, householders? | T: What do you think, householders?
mn60:30.5 | S: Don’t these doctrines directly contradict each other?” | T: Don’t these contemplatives & brahmans speak in direct opposition to each other?”
mn60:30.6 | S: “Yes, sir.” | T: “Yes, lord.”
mn60:31.1 | S: “A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: | T: “With regard to this, an observant person considers thus:
mn60:31.2 | S: ‘Some ascetics and brahmins say that | T: ‘As for those venerable contemplatives & brahmans who hold this doctrine, hold this view—
mn60:31.3 | S: there are no totally formless meditations, but I have not seen that. | T: “There is no total formlessness”—I haven’t seen that.
mn60:31.4 | S: Some ascetics and brahmins say that | T: As for those venerable contemplatives & brahmans who hold this doctrine, hold this view—
mn60:31.5 | S: there are totally formless meditations, but I have not known that. | T: “There is total formlessness”—I haven’t known that.
mn60:31.6 | S: Without knowing or seeing, it would not be appropriate for me to take one side and declare, | T: If I, not knowing, not seeing, were to take one side and declare,
mn60:31.7 | S: ‘This is the only truth, anything else is futile.’ | T: “Only this is true, anything otherwise is worthless,” that would not be fitting for me.
mn60:31.8 | S: If those ascetics and brahmins who say that | T: As for those venerable contemplatives & brahmans who hold this doctrine, hold this view—
mn60:31.9 | S: there are no totally formless meditations are correct, it is possible | T: “There is no total formlessness”: If their statement is true,
mn60:31.10 | S: that it’s a sure bet I will be reborn among the gods who are formed and made of mind. | T: there’s the safe-bet possibility that I might reappear among the mind-made devas of form.
mn60:31.11 | S: If those ascetics and brahmins who say that | T: As for those venerable contemplatives & brahmans who hold this doctrine, hold this view—
mn60:31.12 | S: there are totally formless meditations are correct, it is possible | T: “There is total formlessness”: If their statement is true,
mn60:31.13 | S: that it’s a sure bet I will be reborn among the gods who are formless and made of perception. | T: there’s the safe-bet possibility that I might reappear among the perception-made devas of no form.
mn60:31.14 | S: Now, owing to form, bad things are seen: taking up the rod and the sword, quarrels, arguments, and disputes, accusations, backbiting, and lies. | T: The taking up of rods & weapons, quarrels, contention, disputes, recrimination, divisiveness, & false speech are seen to arise from form,
mn60:31.15 | S: But those things don’t exist where it is totally formless.’ | T: but not from total formlessness.’
mn60:31.16 | S: Reflecting like this, they simply practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding forms. | T: Reflecting thus, he practices for disenchantment toward forms, for dispassion toward forms, and for the cessation of forms.
mn60:32.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: | T: Cessation of Becoming “There are some contemplatives & brahmans who hold this doctrine, hold this view:
mn60:32.2 | S: ‘There is no such thing as the total cessation of continued existence.’ | T: ‘There is no total cessation of becoming.’
mn60:33.1 | S: And there are some ascetics and brahmins whose doctrine directly contradicts this. | T: Some contemplatives & brahmans, speaking in direct opposition to those contemplatives & brahmans,
mn60:33.2 | S: They say: | T: say this:
mn60:33.3 | S: ‘There is such a thing as the total cessation of continued existence.’ | T: ‘There is total cessation of becoming.’
mn60:33.4 | S: What do you think, householders? | T: What do you think, householders?
mn60:33.5 | S: Don’t these doctrines directly contradict each other?” | T: Don’t these contemplatives & brahmans speak in direct opposition to each other?”
mn60:33.6 | S: “Yes, sir.” | T: “Yes, lord.”
mn60:34.1 | S: “A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: | T: “With regard to this, an observant person considers thus:
mn60:34.2 | S: ‘Some ascetics and brahmins say that | T: ‘As for those venerable contemplatives & brahmans who hold this doctrine, hold this view—
mn60:34.3 | S: there is no such thing as the total cessation of continued existence, but I have not seen that. | T: “There is no total cessation of becoming”—I haven’t seen that.
mn60:34.4 | S: Some ascetics and brahmins say that | T: As for those venerable contemplatives & brahmans who hold this doctrine, hold this view—
mn60:34.5 | S: there is such a thing as the total cessation of continued existence, but I have not known that. | T: “There is total cessation of becoming”—I haven’t known that.
mn60:34.6 | S: Without knowing or seeing, it would not be appropriate for me to take one side and declare, | T: If I, not knowing, not seeing, were to take one side and declare,
mn60:34.7 | S: ‘This is the only truth, anything else is futile.’ | T: “Only this is true, anything otherwise is worthless,” that would not be fitting for me.
mn60:34.8 | S: If those ascetics and brahmins who say that | T: As for those venerable contemplatives & brahmans who hold this doctrine, hold this view—
mn60:34.9 | S: there is no such thing as the total cessation of continued existence are correct, it is possible | T: “There is no total cessation of becoming”: If their statement is true,
mn60:34.10 | S: that it’s a sure bet I will be reborn among the gods who are formless and made of perception. | T: there’s the safe-bet possibility that I might reappear among the perception-made devas of no form.
mn60:34.11 | S: If those ascetics and brahmins who say that | T: As for those venerable contemplatives & brahmans who hold this doctrine, hold this view—
mn60:34.12 | S: there is such a thing as the total cessation of continued existence are correct, it is possible | T: “There is total cessation of becoming”: If their statement is true, it is possible that I will be totally unbound in the here & now.
mn60:34.13 | S: that I will be fully extinguished in this very life. | T: (none)
mn60:34.14 | S: The view of those ascetics and brahmins who say that | T: As for those venerable contemplatives & brahmans who hold this doctrine, hold this view—
mn60:34.15 | S: there is no such thing as the total cessation of continued existence is close to greed, yoking, relishing, attachment, and grasping. | T: “There is no total cessation of becoming”: This view of theirs borders on passion, borders on fettering, borders on relishing, borders on grasping, borders on clinging.
mn60:34.16 | S: The view of those ascetics and brahmins who say that | T: As for those venerable contemplatives & brahmans who hold this doctrine, hold this view—
mn60:34.17 | S: there is such a thing as the total cessation of continued existence is close to non-greed, non-yoking, non-relishing, non-attachment, and non-grasping.’ | T: “There is total cessation of becoming”: This view of theirs borders on non-passion, borders on non-fettering, borders on non-relishing, borders on non-grasping, borders on non-clinging.’
mn60:34.18 | S: Reflecting like this, they simply practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding future lives. | T: Reflecting thus, he practices for disenchantment toward becomings, for dispassion toward becomings, and for the cessation of becomings.
mn60:35.1 | S: Householders, these four individuals are found in the world. | T: Four Individuals “Householders, there are these four types of individuals to be found existing in the world.
mn60:35.2 | S: What four? | T: Which four?
mn60:35.3 | S: One individual mortifies themselves, committed to the practice of mortifying themselves. | T: There is the case where a certain individual torments himself and is devoted to the practice of torturing himself.
mn60:35.4 | S: One individual mortifies others, committed to the practice of mortifying others. | T: There is the case where a certain individual torments others and is devoted to the practice of torturing others.
mn60:35.5 | S: One individual mortifies themselves and others, committed to the practice of mortifying themselves and others. | T: There is the case where a certain individual torments himself and is devoted to the practice of torturing himself, and also torments others and is devoted to the practice of torturing others.
mn60:35.6 | S: One individual doesn’t mortify either themselves or others, committed to the practice of not mortifying themselves or others. | T: There is the case where a certain individual neither torments himself nor is he devoted to the practice of torturing himself, neither torments others nor is he devoted to the practice of torturing others. Neither tormenting himself nor tormenting others,
mn60:35.7 | S: They live without wishes in this very life, quenched, cooled, experiencing bliss, with self become divine. | T: he dwells in the here & now free of hunger, unbound, cooled, sensitive to happiness, with a Brahmā-like mind.
mn60:36.1 | S: And what individual mortifies themselves, committed to the practice of mortifying themselves? | T: “And which is the individual who torments himself and is devoted to the practice of torturing himself?
mn60:36.2 | S: It’s when a person goes naked, ignoring conventions. … | T: There is the case where a certain individual goes without cloth, rejecting conventions, licking his hands, not coming when called, not staying when asked. He does not accept food brought or specially made. He does not consent to an invitation (to a meal). He doesn’t receive anything from the mouth of a pot, from the mouth of a container, across a threshold, across a stick, across a pestle, from two eating together, from a pregnant woman, from a woman nursing a child, from a woman living with a man, from where it is announced that food is to be distributed, from where a dog is waiting, from where flies are buzzing. He accepts no meat, no distilled liquor, no wine, no fermented liquor. He limits himself to one house for one morsel, to two houses for two morsels… to seven houses for seven morsels. He lives on one saucerful a day, two saucerfuls a day… seven saucerfuls a day. He takes food once a day, once every two days… once every seven days, and so on up to once every half-month. He remains devoted to the practice of regulating his intake of food. He eats a diet of green vegetables or millet or wild rice or hide-parings or moss or rice bran or rice-water or sesame flour or grass or cow dung. He lives off forest roots & fruits. He eats fallen fruits. He clothes himself in hemp, in canvas, in shrouds, in thrown-away rags, in tree bark, in antelope hide, in wood-shavings fabric, in head-hair wool, in wild-animal wool, in owls’ wings. He is a hair-&-beard puller, one devoted to the practice of pulling out his hair & beard. He is a stander, one who rejects seats. He is a hands-around-the-knees sitter, one devoted to the exertion of sitting with his hands around his knees. He is a spike-mattresser, one who makes his bed on a bed of spikes. He is a third-time-in-the-evening bather, one who stays devoted to the practice of bathing in water.
mn60:36.3 | S: And so they live committed to practicing these various ways of mortifying and tormenting the body. | T: Thus, in these many ways, he is devoted to the practice of tormenting & torturing the body.
mn60:36.4 | S: This is called an individual who mortifies themselves, being committed to the practice of mortifying themselves. | T: This is called an individual who torments himself and is devoted to the practice of torturing himself.
mn60:37.1 | S: And what individual mortifies others, committed to the practice of mortifying others? | T: “And which is the individual who torments others and is devoted to the practice of torturing others?
mn60:37.2 | S: It’s when an individual is a butcher of sheep, pigs, poultry, or deer, a hunter or fisher, a bandit, an executioner, a butcher of cattle, a jailer, or has some other cruel livelihood. | T: There is the case where a certain individual is a butcher of sheep, a butcher of pigs, a butcher of fowl, a trapper, a hunter, a fisherman, a thief, an executioner, a prison warden, or anyone who follows any other bloody occupation.
mn60:37.3 | S: This is called an individual who mortifies others, being committed to the practice of mortifying others. | T: This is called an individual who torments others and is devoted to the practice of torturing others.
mn60:38.1 | S: And what individual mortifies themselves and others, being committed to the practice of mortifying themselves and others? | T: “And which is the individual who torments himself and is devoted to the practice of torturing himself, and also torments others and is devoted to the practice of torturing others?
mn60:38.2 | S: It’s when an individual is an anointed aristocratic king or a well-to-do brahmin. He has a new ceremonial hall built to the east of the citadel. He shaves off his hair and beard, dresses in a rough antelope hide, and smears his body with ghee and oil. … | T: There is the case where an individual is a head-anointed noble warrior king, or a brahman of great wealth. Having had a new temple built to the east of the city, having shaved off his hair & beard, having dressed himself in a rough hide, having smeared his body with ghee & oil, and scratching his back with a deer horn, he enters the new temple along with his chief queen & brahman high priest. There he makes his bed on the bare ground strewn with grass. The king lives off the milk from the first teat of a cow with an identical calf; the queen lives off the milk from the second teat; the brahman high priest, off the milk from the third teat. The milk from the fourth teat they pour into the fire. The calf lives on what is left. “He says, ‘Let so many bulls be slaughtered for the sacrifice. Let so many bullocks… so many heifers… so many goats… so many sheep.… Let so many horses be slaughtered for the sacrifice. Let so many trees be cut down for the sacrificial posts; let so many plants be mowed down for the sacrificial grass.’
mn60:38.3 | S: His bondservants, servants, and workers do their jobs under threat of punishment and danger, weeping, with tearful faces. | T: And his slaves, servants, & workers make preparations, weeping with tearful faces, spurred on by punishment, spurred on by fear.
mn60:38.4 | S: This is called an individual who mortifies themselves and others, being committed to the practice of mortifying themselves and others. | T: This is called an individual who torments himself and is devoted to the practice of torturing himself, and also torments others and is devoted to the practice of torturing others.
mn60:39.1 | S: And what individual doesn’t mortify either themselves or others, committed to the practice of not mortifying themselves or others, | T: “And which is the individual who neither torments himself nor is devoted to the practice of torturing himself, neither torments others nor is devoted to the practice of torturing others; who—neither tormenting himself nor tormenting others—
mn60:39.2 | S: living without wishes in this very life, quenched, cooled, experiencing bliss, with self become divine? | T: dwells in the here & now free of hunger, unbound, cooled, sensitive to happiness with a Brahmā-like mind? “There is the case where a Tathāgata appears in the world, worthy & rightly self-awakened. He teaches the Dhamma admirable in its beginning, admirable in its middle, admirable in its end. He proclaims the holy life both in its particulars and in its essence, entirely perfect, surpassingly pure. “A householder or householder’s son, hearing the Dhamma, gains conviction in the Tathāgata and reflects: ‘Household life is confining, a dusty path. Life gone forth is the open air. It isn’t easy, living at home, to practice the holy life totally perfect, totally pure, a polished shell. What if I, having shaved off my hair & beard and putting on the ochre robe, were to go forth from the household life into homelessness?’ “So after some time he abandons his mass of wealth, large or small; leaves his circle of relatives, large or small; shaves off his hair and beard, puts on the ochre robes, and goes forth from the household life into homelessness. Virtue “When he has thus gone forth, endowed with the monks’ training & livelihood, then—abandoning the taking of life—he abstains from the taking of life. He dwells with his rod laid down, his knife laid down, scrupulous, merciful, sympathetic for the welfare of all living beings. “Abandoning the taking of what is not given, he abstains from taking what is not given. He takes only what is given, accepts only what is given, lives not by stealth but by means of a self that has become pure. “Abandoning uncelibacy, he lives a celibate life, aloof, refraining from the sexual act that is the villager’s way. “Abandoning false speech, he abstains from false speech. He speaks the truth, holds to the truth, is firm, reliable, no deceiver of the world. “Abandoning divisive speech he abstains from divisive speech. What he has heard here he does not tell there to break those people apart from these people here. What he has heard there he does not tell here to break these people apart from those people there. Thus reconciling those who have broken apart or cementing those who are united, he loves concord, delights in concord, enjoys concord, speaks things that create concord. “Abandoning abusive speech, he abstains from abusive speech. He speaks words that are soothing to the ear, that are affectionate, that go to the heart, that are polite, appealing and pleasing to people at large. “Abandoning idle chatter, he abstains from idle chatter. He speaks in season, speaks what is factual, what is in accordance with the goal, the Dhamma, and the Vinaya. He speaks words worth treasuring, seasonable, reasonable, circumscribed, connected with the goal. “He abstains from damaging seed and plant life. “He eats only once a day, refraining from the evening meal and from food at the wrong time of day. “He abstains from dancing, singing, instrumental music, and from watching shows. “He abstains from wearing garlands and from beautifying himself with scents and cosmetics. “He abstains from high and luxurious beds and seats. “He abstains from accepting gold and money. “He abstains from accepting uncooked grain… raw meat… women and girls… male and female slaves… goats and sheep… fowl and pigs… elephants, cattle, steeds, and mares… fields and property. “He abstains from running messages… from buying and selling… from dealing with false scales, false metals, and false measures… from bribery, deception, and fraud. “He abstains from mutilating, executing, imprisoning, highway robbery, plunder, and violence. “He is content with a set of robes to provide for his body and alms food to provide for his hunger.
mn60:40-54.1 | S: It’s when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully awakened Buddha … | T: Just as a bird, wherever it goes, flies with its wings as its only burden; so too is he content with a set of robes to provide for his body and alms food to provide for his hunger. Wherever he goes, he takes only his barest necessities along. “Endowed with this noble aggregate of virtue, he is inwardly sensitive to the pleasure of being blameless. Sense Restraint “On seeing a form with the eye, he does not grasp at any theme or details by which—if he were to dwell without restraint over the faculty of the eye—evil, unskillful qualities such as greed or distress might assail him.
mn60:40-54.2 | S: A householder hears that teaching, or a householder’s child, or someone reborn in some good family. … | T: On hearing a sound with the ear.… On smelling an aroma with the nose.… On tasting a flavor with the tongue.… On touching a tactile sensation with the body.… On cognizing an idea with the intellect, he does not grasp at any theme or details by which—if he were to dwell without restraint over the faculty of the intellect—evil, unskillful qualities such as greed or distress might assail him. Endowed with this noble restraint over the sense faculties, he is inwardly sensitive to the pleasure of being blameless. Mindfulness & Alertness “When going forward and returning, he makes himself alert. When looking toward and looking away… when bending and extending his limbs… when carrying his outer cloak, his upper robe, and his bowl… when eating, drinking, chewing, and tasting… when urinating and defecating… when walking, standing, sitting, falling asleep, waking up, talking, and remaining silent, he makes himself alert. Abandoning the Hindrances “Endowed with this noble aggregate of virtue, this noble restraint over the sense faculties, this noble mindfulness & alertness, he seeks out a secluded dwelling: a wilderness, the shade of a tree, a mountain, a glen, a hillside cave, a charnel ground, a forest grove, the open air, a heap of straw. After his meal, returning from his alms round, he sits down, crosses his legs, holds his body erect, and brings mindfulness to the fore. “Abandoning covetousness with regard to the world, he dwells with an awareness devoid of covetousness. He cleanses his mind of covetousness. Abandoning ill will and anger, he dwells with an awareness devoid of ill will, sympathetic with the welfare of all living beings. He cleanses his mind of ill will and anger. Abandoning sloth and drowsiness, he dwells with an awareness devoid of sloth and drowsiness, mindful, alert, percipient of light. He cleanses his mind of sloth and drowsiness. Abandoning restlessness and anxiety, he dwells undisturbed, his mind inwardly stilled. He cleanses his mind of restlessness and anxiety. Abandoning uncertainty, he dwells having crossed over uncertainty, with no perplexity with regard to skillful qualities. He cleanses his mind of uncertainty.
mn60:40-54.3 | S: They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken wisdom. | T: The Four Jhānas “Having abandoned these five hindrances—imperfections of awareness that weaken discernment—
mn60:40-54.4 | S: Then, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption … | T: then, quite secluded from sensuality, secluded from unskillful qualities, he enters and remains in the first jhāna: rapture & pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by directed thought & evaluation.
mn60:40-54.5 | S: second absorption … | T: “Then, with the stilling of directed thoughts & evaluations, he enters and remains in the second jhāna: rapture & pleasure born of concentration, unification of awareness free from directed thought & evaluation—internal assurance.
mn60:40-54.6 | S: third absorption … | T: “Then, with the fading of rapture, he remains equanimous, mindful, & alert, and senses pleasure with the body. He enters and remains in the third jhāna, of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous & mindful, he has a pleasant abiding.’
mn60:40-54.7 | S: fourth absorption. | T: “Then, with the abandoning of pleasure & pain—as with the earlier disappearance of elation & distress—he enters and remains in the fourth jhāna: purity of equanimity & mindfulness, neither pleasure nor pain.
mn60:55.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward recollection of past lives. … | T: The Three Knowledges “With his mind thus concentrated, purified, and bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to knowledge of the recollection of past lives (lit: previous homes).
mn60:55.2 | S: They recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details. | T: He recollects his manifold past lives, i.e., one birth, two births, three births, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, one hundred, one thousand, one hundred thousand, many eons of cosmic contraction, many eons of cosmic expansion, many eons of cosmic contraction and expansion, (recollecting,) ‘There I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance. Such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such the end of my life. Passing away from that state, I re-arose there. There too I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance. Such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such the end of my life. Passing away from that state, I re-arose here.’ Thus he recollects his manifold past lives in their modes and details. This, too, is how striving is fruitful, how exertion is fruitful.
mn60:55.3 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings. | T: “With his mind thus concentrated, purified, and bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to knowledge of the passing away and re-appearance of beings.
mn60:55.4 | S: With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. … They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. | T: He sees—by means of the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human—beings passing away and re-appearing, and he discerns how they are inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate in accordance with their kamma: ‘These beings—who were endowed with bad conduct of body, speech, and mind, who reviled the noble ones, held wrong views and undertook actions under the influence of wrong views—with the breakup of the body, after death, have re-appeared in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell. But these beings—who were endowed with good conduct of body, speech, and mind, who did not revile the noble ones, who held right views and undertook actions under the influence of right views—with the breakup of the body, after death, have re-appeared in a good destination, a heavenly world.’ Thus—by means of the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human—he sees beings passing away and re-appearing, and he discerns how they are inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate in accordance with their kamma.
mn60:55.5 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward knowledge of the ending of defilements. | T: “With his mind thus concentrated, purified, and bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, and attained to imperturbability, the monk directs and inclines it to the knowledge of the ending of the effluents.
mn60:55.6 | S: They truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. | T: He discerns, as it has come to be, that ‘This is stress… This is the origination of stress… This is the cessation of stress… This is the way leading to the cessation of stress…
mn60:55.7 | S: They truly understand: ‘These are defilements’ … ‘This is the origin of defilements’ … ‘This is the cessation of defilements’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements’. | T: These are effluents… This is the origination of effluents… This is the cessation of effluents… This is the way leading to the cessation of effluents.’
mn60:55.8 | S: Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. | T: His heart, thus knowing, thus seeing, is released from the effluent of sensuality, released from the effluent of becoming, released from the effluent of ignorance.
mn60:55.9 | S: When they’re freed, they know they’re freed. | T: With release, there is the knowledge, ‘Released.’
mn60:55.10 | S: They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’ | T: He discerns that ‘Birth is ended, the holy life fulfilled, the task done. There is nothing further for this world.’
mn60:56.1 | S: This is called an individual who neither mortifies themselves or others, being committed to the practice of not mortifying themselves or others. | T: “This is called an individual who neither torments himself nor is devoted to the practice of torturing himself, who neither torments others nor is devoted to the practice of torturing others.
mn60:56.2 | S: They live without wishes in this very life, quenched, cooled, experiencing bliss, with self become divine.” | T: Neither tormenting himself nor tormenting others, he dwells in the here & now free of hunger, unbound, cooled, sensitive to happiness, with a Brahmā-like mind.”
mn60:57.1 | S: When he had spoken, the brahmins and householders of Sālā said to the Buddha, | T: When this was said, the brahman householders of Sāla said,
mn60:57.2 | S: “Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! | T: “Magnificent, master Gotama! Magnificent!
mn60:57.3 | S: As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, worthy Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. | T: Just as if he were to place upright what was overturned, to reveal what was hidden, to show the way to one who was lost, or to carry a lamp into the dark so that those with eyes could see forms, in the same way has master Gotama—through many lines of reasoning—made the Dhamma clear.
mn60:57.4 | S: We go for refuge to the worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. | T: We go to master Gotama for refuge, to the Dhamma, and to the Saṅgha of monks.
mn60:57.5 | S: From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember us as lay followers who have gone for refuge for life.” | T: May master Gotama remember us as lay followers who have gone to him for refuge, from this day forward, for life.”

## an3.35
an3.35:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: (none)
an3.35:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Āḷavī, on a mat of leaves by a cow-path in a rosewood grove. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Āḷavī on a spread of leaves by a cattle track in a siṁsapā forest.
an3.35:1.3 | S: Then as Hatthaka of Āḷavī was going for a walk he saw the Buddha sitting on that mat of leaves. | T: Then Hatthaka of Āḷavī, out roaming & rambling for exercise, saw the Blessed One sitting on a spread of leaves by the cattle track in the siṁsapā forest.
an3.35:1.4 | S: He went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said, | T: On seeing him, he went to him and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there he said to the Blessed One,
an3.35:1.5 | S: “Sir, I trust the Buddha slept well?” | T: “Lord, I hope the Blessed One has slept in ease.”
an3.35:1.6 | S: “Yes, prince, I slept well. | T: “Yes, young man. I have slept in ease.
an3.35:1.7 | S: I am one of those who sleep at ease in the world.” | T: Of those in the world who sleep in ease, I am one.”
an3.35:2.1 | S: “The winter nights are cold, sir, and it’s the week of mid-winter, when the snow falls. Rough is the ground trampled under the cows’ hooves, and thin is the mat of leaves. The leaves are sparse on the trees, the ocher robes are cold, and cold blows the north wind. | T: “But cold, lord, is the winter night. The ‘Between-the-Eights’ is a time of snowfall. Hard is the ground trampled by cattle hooves. Thin is the spread of leaves. Sparse are the leaves in the trees. Thin are your ochre robes. And cold blows the Verambhā wind.
an3.35:2.2 | S: And yet the Buddha says, | T: Yet still the Blessed One says,
an3.35:2.3 | S: ‘Yes, prince, I slept well. | T: ‘Yes, young man. I have slept in ease.
an3.35:2.4 | S: I am one of those who sleep at ease in the world.’” | T: Of those in the world who sleep in ease, I am one.’”
an3.35:3.1 | S: “Well then, prince, I’ll ask you about this in return, and you can answer as you like. | T: “In that case, young man, I will question you in return. Answer as you see fit.
an3.35:3.2 | S: What do you think? Take the case of a householder or his son, who lives in a bungalow, plastered inside and out, draft-free, with door fastened and window shuttered. | T: Now, what do you think? Suppose a householder or householder’s son has a house with a gabled roof, plastered inside & out, draft-free, with close-fitting door & windows shut against the wind.
an3.35:3.3 | S: His couch is spread with woolen covers—shag-piled, pure white, or embroidered with flowers—and spread with a fine deer hide. It has a canopy above and red pillows at both ends. | T: Inside he has a throne-like bed spread with a long-fleeced coverlet, a white wool coverlet, an embroidered coverlet, a rug of kadali-deer hide, with a canopy above, & red cushions on either side.
an3.35:3.4 | S: An oil lamp is burning there, | T: And there a lamp would be burning,
an3.35:3.5 | S: while his four wives attend to him in all manner of agreeable ways. | T: and his four wives, with their many charms, would be attending to him.
an3.35:3.6 | S: What do you think, prince, would he sleep at ease, or not? | T: Would he sleep in ease, or not?
an3.35:3.7 | S: Or how do you see this?” | T: Or how does this strike you?”
an3.35:3.8 | S: “He would sleep at ease, sir. | T: “Yes, lord, he would sleep in ease.
an3.35:3.9 | S: Of those who sleep at ease in the world, he would be one.” | T: Of those in the world who sleep in ease, he would be one.”
an3.35:4.1 | S: “What do you think, prince? | T: “But what do you think, young man?
an3.35:4.2 | S: Is it not possible that a fever born of greed—physical or mental—might arise in that householder or householder’s son, burning him so he sleeps badly?” | T: Might there arise in that householder or householder’s son any bodily fevers or fevers of mind born of passion so that—burned with those passion-born fevers—he would sleep miserably?”
an3.35:4.3 | S: “Yes, sir.” | T: “Yes, lord.”
an3.35:5.1 | S: “The greed that burns that householder or householder’s son, making them sleep badly, has been cut off at the root by the Realized One, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. | T: “As for those passion-born fevers—burned with which the householder or householder’s son would sleep miserably—that passion has been abandoned by the Tathāgata, its root destroyed, made like a palmyra stump, deprived of the conditions of development, not destined for future arising.
an3.35:5.2 | S: That’s why I sleep at ease. | T: Therefore he sleeps in ease.
an3.35:6.1 | S: What do you think, prince? | T: “Now, what do you think,
an3.35:6.2 | S: Is it not possible that a fever born of hate … | T: young man?
an3.35:6.3 | S: or a fever born of delusion—physical or mental—might arise in that householder or householder’s son, burning him so he sleeps badly?” | T: Might there arise in that householder or householder’s son any bodily fevers or fevers of mind born of aversion so that—burned with those aversion-born fevers—he would sleep miserably?”
an3.35:6.4 | S: “Yes, sir.” | T: “Yes, lord.”
an3.35:7.1 | S: “The delusion that burns that householder or householder’s son, making them sleep badly, has been cut off at the root by the Realized One, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. | T: “As for those aversion-born fevers—burned with which the householder or householder’s son would sleep miserably—that aversion has been abandoned by the Tathāgata, its root destroyed, made like a palmyra stump, deprived of the conditions of development, not destined for future arising. Therefore he sleeps in ease. “Now, what do you think, young man? Might there arise in that householder or householder’s son any bodily fevers or fevers of mind born of delusion so that—burned with those delusion-born fevers—he would sleep miserably?” “Yes, lord.” “As for those delusion-born fevers—burned with which the householder or householder’s son would sleep miserably—that delusion has been abandoned by the Tathāgata, its root destroyed, made like a palmyra stump, deprived of the conditions of development, not destined for future arising.
an3.35:7.2 | S: That’s why I sleep at ease. | T: Therefore he sleeps in ease.
an3.35:8.1 | S: A brahmin who is fully quenched | T: “Always, always, he sleeps in ease: the brahman totally unbound,
an3.35:8.2 | S: always sleeps at ease. | T: who doesn’t adhere
an3.35:8.3 | S: Sensual pleasures slip off them, | T: to sensual pleasures,
an3.35:8.4 | S: they’re cooled, free of attachments. | T: who’s without acquisitions & cooled.
an3.35:9.1 | S: Since they’ve cut off all clinging, | T: Having cut all ties
an3.35:9.2 | S: and removed the stress from the heart, | T: & subdued fear in the heart,
an3.35:9.3 | S: the peaceful sleep at ease, | T: calmed, he sleeps in ease,
an3.35:9.4 | S: having found peace of mind.” | T: having reached peace
an3.35:9.5 | P: Pañcamaṁ. | T: of awareness.”

