## mn136, continued
mn136:16.1 | S: In this case, when an ascetic or brahmin says this: | T: “Now, Ānanda, in the case where the contemplative or brahman says,
mn136:16.2 | S: ‘It seems that there is no such thing as good deeds, and the result of good conduct,’ I don’t grant them that. | T: ‘So there really are no fine actions, there really is no result of good conduct,’ I don’t allow him that.
mn136:16.3 | S: But when they say: | T: But when he says,
mn136:16.4 | S: ‘I have seen an individual here who refrained from killing living creatures … and had right view. And after death, they were reborn in hell,’ I grant them that. | T: ‘For I saw the case where a person who abstained from taking life… & held right view, with the breakup of the body, after death, has reappeared in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell,’ I do allow him that.
mn136:16.5 | S: But when they say: | T: But when he says,
mn136:16.6 | S: ‘It seems that everyone who refrains from killing living creatures … and has right view is reborn in hell,’ I don’t grant them that. | T: ‘Anyone who abstains from taking life… & holds right view: They all, on the breakup of the body, after death, reappear in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell,’ I don’t allow him that.
mn136:16.7 | S: But when they say: ‘Those whose notion is this have the right notion. | T: And when he says, ‘Whoever knows this, knows rightly.
mn136:16.8 | S: Those whose notion is otherwise have a wrong notion,’ I also don’t grant them that. | T: Whoever knows otherwise, their knowledge is wrong,’ I don’t allow him that.
mn136:16.9 | S: And when they obstinately stick to what they have known, seen, and understood for themselves, insisting that: ‘This is the only truth, anything else is futile,’ I also don’t grant them that. | T: When, insisting through obstinacy & grasping right there on what was seen by himself, known by himself, understood by himself, he states: ‘Only this is true. Everything otherwise is worthless,’ I don’t allow him that, either.
mn136:16.10 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn136:16.11 | S: Because the Realized One’s knowledge of the great analysis of deeds is otherwise. | T: Because the Tathāgata’s knowledge with regard to the greater analysis of action is otherwise.
mn136:17.1 | S: Now, Ānanda, take the case of the individual here who killed living creatures … and had wrong view, and who, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: “Now, Ānanda, in the case of the person who takes life… & holds wrong view and, with the breakup of the body, after death, reappears in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell:
mn136:17.2 | S: That bad deed of theirs that is to be experienced as painful was either done previously, or later, or else at the time of death they undertook wrong view. | T: Either earlier he performed evil action that is to be felt as painful, or later he performed evil action that is to be felt as painful, or at the time of death he adopted & carried out wrong view.
mn136:17.3 | S: And that’s why, when their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: Because of that, with the breakup of the body, after death, he reappears in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.
mn136:17.4 | S: But anyone here who kills living creatures … and has wrong view experiences the result of that in this very life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. | T: And as for the results of taking life… holding wrong view, he will feel them either right here & now, or in the next (lifetime), or following that.
mn136:18.1 | S: Now, Ānanda, take the case of the individual here who killed living creatures … and had wrong view, and who is reborn in a heavenly realm. | T: “In the case of the person who takes life… & holds wrong view (yet), with the breakup of the body, after death, reappears in a good destination, a heavenly world:
mn136:18.2 | S: That good deed of theirs that is to be experienced as pleasurable was either done previously, or later, or else at the time of death they undertook right view. | T: Either earlier he performed fine action that is to be felt as pleasant, or later he performed fine action that is to be felt as pleasant, or at the time of death he adopted & carried out right view.
mn136:18.3 | S: And that’s why, when their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. | T: Because of that, with the breakup of the body, after death, he reappears in a good destination, a heavenly world.
mn136:18.4 | S: But anyone here who kills living creatures … and has wrong view experiences the result of that in this very life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. | T: But as for the results of taking life… holding wrong view, he will feel them either right here & now, or in the next (lifetime), or following that.
mn136:19.1 | S: Now, Ānanda, take the case of the individual here who refrained from killing living creatures … and had right view, and who is reborn in a heavenly realm. | T: “In the case of the person who abstains from taking life… & holds right view and, with the breakup of the body, after death, reappears in a good destination, a heavenly world:
mn136:19.2 | S: That good deed of theirs that is to be experienced as pleasurable was either done previously, or later, or else at the time of death they undertook right view. | T: Either earlier he performed fine action that is to be felt as pleasant, or later he performed fine action that is to be felt as pleasant, or at the time of death he adopted & carried out right view.
mn136:19.3 | S: And that’s why, when their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. | T: Because of that, with the breakup of the body, after death, he reappears in a good destination, a heavenly world.
mn136:19.4 | S: But anyone here who refrains from killing living creatures … and has right view experiences the result of that in this very life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. | T: And as for the results of abstaining from taking life… holding right view, he will feel them either right here & now, or in the next (lifetime), or following that.”
mn136:20.1 | S: Now, Ānanda, take the case of the individual here who refrained from killing living creatures … and had right view, and who is reborn in hell. | T: “In the case of the person who abstains from taking life… & holds right view (yet) with the breakup of the body, after death, reappears in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell:
mn136:20.2 | S: That bad deed of theirs that is to be experienced as painful was either done previously, or later, or else at the time of death they undertook wrong view. | T: Either earlier he performed evil action that is to be felt as painful, or later he performed evil action that is to be felt as painful, or at the time of death he adopted & carried out wrong view.
mn136:20.3 | S: And that’s why, when their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: Because of that, with the breakup of the body, after death, he reappears in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.
mn136:20.4 | S: But anyone here who refrains from killing living creatures … and has right view experiences the result of that in this very life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. | T: But as for the results of abstaining from taking life… holding right view, he will feel them either right here & now, or in the next (lifetime), or following that.
mn136:21.1 | S: So, Ānanda, there are deeds that are ineffective and appear ineffective. There are deeds that are ineffective but appear effective. There are deeds that are effective and appear effective. And there are deeds that are effective but appear ineffective.” | T: “Thus, Ānanda, there is action that is ineffectual and apparently ineffectual. There is action that is ineffectual but apparently effectual. There is action that is both effectual and apparently effectual. There is action that is effectual but apparently ineffectual.”
mn136:21.2 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: That is what the Blessed One said.
mn136:21.3 | S: Satisfied, Venerable Ānanda approved what the Buddha said. | T: Gratified, Ven. Ānanda delighted in the Blessed One’s words.

## an5.30
an5.30:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: (none)
an5.30:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he arrived at a village of the Kosalan brahmins named Icchānaṅgala. | T: I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One, on a wandering tour among the Kosalans with a large Saṅgha of monks, arrived at a Kosalan brahman village named Icchānaṅgala.
an5.30:1.3 | S: He stayed in a forest near Icchānaṅgala. | T: There he stayed in the Icchānaṅgala forest grove.
an5.30:1.4 | S: The brahmins and householders of Icchānaṅgala heard: | T: The brahman householders of Icchānaṅgala heard it said,
an5.30:1.5 | S: “It seems the ascetic Gotama—a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family—has arrived at Icchānaṅgala. He is staying in a forest near Icchānaṅgala. | T: “Gotama the contemplative—the son of the Sakyans, having gone forth from the Sakyan clan—on a wandering tour among the Kosalans with a large Saṅgha of monks—has arrived at Icchānaṅgala and is staying in the Icchānaṅgala forest grove.
an5.30:1.6 | S: He has this good reputation: | T: And of that Master Gotama this fine reputation has spread:
an5.30:1.7 | S: ‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ | T: ‘He is indeed a Blessed One, worthy & rightly self-awakened, consummate in clear-knowing & conduct, well-gone, an expert with regard to the cosmos, unexcelled trainer of people fit to be tamed, teacher of devas & human beings, awakened, blessed.
an5.30:1.8 | S: He has realized with his own insight this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—and he makes it known to others. | T: He makes known—having realized it through direct knowledge—this world with its devas, Māras, & Brahmās, this generation with its contemplatives & brahmans, its royalty & commonfolk;
an5.30:1.9 | S: He teaches Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. | T: he explains the Dhamma admirable in the beginning, admirable in the middle, admirable in the end; he expounds the holy life both in its particulars & in its essence, entirely perfect, surpassingly pure.
an5.30:1.10 | S: It’s good to see such perfected ones.” | T: It is good to see such a worthy one.’”
an5.30:1.11 | S: Then, when the night had passed, they took abundant fresh and cooked foods and went to the forest near Icchānaṅgala, where they stood outside the gates making a colossal racket. | T: So the brahman householders of Icchānaṅgala, when the night was gone, taking many staple & non-staple foods, went to the gate house of the Icchānaṅgala forest grove. On arrival they stood there making a loud racket, a great racket.
an5.30:2.1 | S: Now, at that time Venerable Nāgita was the Buddha’s attendant. | T: Now at that time Ven. Nāgita was the Blessed One’s attendant.
an5.30:2.2 | S: Then the Buddha said to Nāgita, | T: So the Blessed One addressed Ven. Nāgita:
an5.30:2.3 | S: “Nāgita, who’s making that colossal racket? You’d think it was fishermen hauling in a catch!” | T: “Nāgita, what is that loud racket, that great racket, like fishermen with a catch of fish?”
an5.30:2.4 | S: “Sir, it’s these brahmins and householders of Icchānaṅgala. They’ve brought many fresh and cooked foods, and they’re standing outside the gates wanting to offer it specially to the Buddha and the mendicant Saṅgha.” | T: “Lord, those are the brahman householders of Icchānaṅgala standing at the gate house to the Icchānaṅgala forest grove, having brought many staple & non-staple foods for the sake of the Blessed One & the Saṅgha of monks.”
an5.30:2.5 | S: “Nāgita, may I never become famous. May fame not come to me. | T: “May I have nothing to do with honor, Nāgita, and honor nothing to do with me.
an5.30:2.6 | S: There are those who can’t get the pleasure of renunciation, the pleasure of seclusion, the pleasure of peace, the pleasure of awakening when they want, without trouble or difficulty like I can. | T: Whoever cannot obtain at will—without difficulty, without trouble—as I do, the pleasure of renunciation, the pleasure of seclusion, the pleasure of peace, the pleasure of self-awakening,
an5.30:2.7 | S: Let them enjoy the filthy, lazy pleasure of possessions, honor, and popularity.” | T: let him consent to this slimy-excrement-pleasure, this torpor-pleasure, this pleasure of gains, offerings, & fame.”
an5.30:3.1 | S: “Sir, may the Blessed One please relent now! May the Holy One relent! | T: “Lord, let the Blessed One acquiesce (to their offerings) now! Let the One Well-Gone acquiesce now!
an5.30:3.2 | S: Now is the time for the Buddha to relent. | T: Now is the time for the Blessed One’s acquiescence, lord! Now is the time for the Blessed One’s acquiescence, lord!
an5.30:3.3 | S: Wherever the Buddha now goes, the brahmins and householders, and people of town and country will incline the same way. | T: Wherever the Blessed One will go now, the brahmans of the towns & countryside will be so inclined.
an5.30:3.4 | S: It’s like when the heavens rain heavily and the water flows downhill. | T: Just as when the rain-devas send rain in fat drops, the waters flow with the incline,
an5.30:3.5 | S: In the same way, wherever the Buddha now goes, the brahmins and householders, and people of town and country will incline the same way. | T: in the same way, wherever the Blessed One will go now, the brahmans of the towns & countryside will be so inclined.
an5.30:3.6 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
an5.30:3.7 | S: Because of the Buddha’s ethics and wisdom.” | T: Because such is the Blessed One’s virtue & discernment.”
an5.30:4.1 | S: “Nāgita, may I never become famous. May fame not come to me. | T: “May I have nothing to do with honor, Nāgita, and honor nothing to do with me.
an5.30:4.2 | S: There are those who can’t get the pleasure of renunciation, the pleasure of seclusion, the pleasure of peace, the pleasure of awakening when they want, without trouble or difficulty like I can. | T: Whoever cannot obtain at will—without difficulty, without trouble—as I do, the pleasure of renunciation, the pleasure of seclusion, the pleasure of peace, the pleasure of self-awakening,
an5.30:4.3 | S: Let them enjoy the filthy, lazy pleasure of possessions, honor, and popularity. | T: let him consent to this slimy-excrement-pleasure, this torpor-pleasure, this pleasure of gains, offerings, & fame.
an5.30:4.4 | S: What you eat, drink, chew, and taste ends up as excrement and urine. | T: “When one eats & drinks & chews & savors, there is excrement & urine:
an5.30:4.5 | S: This is its outcome. | T: That is one’s reward.
an5.30:4.6 | S: When loved ones decay and perish, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress arise. | T: “When one loves, there arises the state of change & aberration, sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair:
an5.30:4.7 | S: This is its outcome. | T: That is one’s reward.
an5.30:4.8 | S: When you pursue meditation on the feature of ugliness, revulsion at the feature of beauty becomes stabilized. | T: “When one is committed to the theme of the unattractive, one takes a stance in the loathesomeness of the theme of beauty:
an5.30:4.9 | S: This is its outcome. | T: That is one’s reward.
an5.30:4.10 | S: When you meditate observing impermanence in the six fields of contact, revulsion at contact becomes stabilized. | T: “When one remains focused on the inconstancy of the six media of sensory contact, one takes a stance in the loathsomeness of contact:
an5.30:4.11 | S: This is its outcome. | T: That is one’s reward.
an5.30:4.12 | S: When you meditate observing rise and fall in the five grasping aggregates, revulsion at grasping becomes stabilized. | T: “When one remains focused on the arising & passing away of the five clinging-aggregates, one takes a stance in the loathsomeness of clinging:
an5.30:4.13 | S: This is its outcome.” | T: That is one’s reward.”

## an7.52
an7.52:1.1 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Campā on the banks of the Gaggarā Lotus Pond. | T: I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Campā on the shore of Gaggarā Lake.
an7.52:1.2 | S: Then several lay followers of Campā went to Venerable Sāriputta, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, | T: Then a large number of lay followers from Campā went to Ven. Sāriputta and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As they were sitting there they said to Ven. Sāriputta:
an7.52:1.3 | S: “Sir, it’s been a long time since we’ve heard a Dhamma talk from the Buddha. | T: “It has been a long time, venerable sir, since we have had a chance to hear a Dhamma talk in the Blessed One’s presence.
an7.52:1.4 | S: It would be good if we got to hear a Dhamma talk from the Buddha.” | T: It would be good if we could get to hear a Dhamma talk in the Blessed One’s presence.”
an7.52:1.5 | S: “Well then, reverends, come on the next sabbath day. | T: “Then in that case, my friends, come again on the next uposatha day,
an7.52:1.6 | S: Hopefully you’ll get to hear a Dhamma talk from the Buddha.” | T: and perhaps you’ll get to hear a Dhamma talk in the Blessed One’s presence.”
an7.52:1.7 | S: “Yes, sir” they replied. Then they rose from their seats, bowed to Sāriputta, and respectfully circled him before leaving. | T: “As you say, venerable sir,” the lay followers from Campā said to Ven. Sāriputta. Rising from their seats, bowing down to him, and then circling him—keeping him on their right—they left.
an7.52:2.1 | S: Then on the next sabbath the lay followers of Campā went to Venerable Sāriputta, bowed, and stood to one side. | T: Then, on the following uposatha day, the lay followers from Campā went to Ven. Sāriputta and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, stood to one side. Then Ven. Sāriputta, together with the lay followers from Campā,
an7.52:2.2 | S: Then they went together with Sāriputta to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. Sāriputta said to the Buddha: | T: went to the Blessed One and on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there, he said to the Blessed One:
an7.52:3.1 | S: “Sir, could it be that someone gives a gift and it is not very fruitful or beneficial, | T: “Might there be the case where a person gives a gift of a certain sort and it does not bear great fruit or great benefit, whereas another person gives a gift of the same sort and it bears great fruit and great benefit?”
an7.52:3.2 | S: while someone else gives exactly the same gift and it is very fruitful and beneficial?” | T: “Yes, Sāriputta, there would be the case where a person gives a gift of a certain sort and it does not bear great fruit or great benefit, whereas another person gives a gift of the same sort and it bears great fruit and great benefit.”
an7.52:3.3 | S: “Indeed it could, Sāriputta.” | T: (none)
an7.52:3.5 | S: “Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason for this?” | T: “Lord, what is the cause, what is the reason,
an7.52:4.1 | S: “Sāriputta, take the case of a someone who gives a gift as an investment, their mind tied to it, expecting to keep it, thinking ‘I’ll enjoy this in my next life.’ | T: why a person gives a gift of a certain sort and it does not bear great fruit or great benefit, whereas another person gives a gift of the same sort and it bears great fruit and great benefit?” “Sāriputta, there is the case where a person gives a gift seeking his own profit, with a mind attached (to the reward), seeking to store up for himself (with the thought), ‘I’ll enjoy this after death.’
an7.52:4.2 | S: They give to ascetics or brahmins such things as food, drink, clothing, vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; and bed, house, and lighting. | T: He gives his gift—food, drink, clothing, a vehicle; a garland, perfume, & ointment; bedding, shelter, & a lamp—to a contemplative or a brahman.
an7.52:4.3 | S: What do you think, Sāriputta, don’t some people give gifts in this way?” | T: What do you think, Sāriputta? Might a person give such a gift as this?”
an7.52:4.4 | S: “Yes, sir.” | T: “Yes, lord.”
an7.52:5.1 | S: “Sāriputta, someone who gives a gift as an investment, | T: “Having given this gift seeking his own profit—with a mind attached (to the reward), seeking to store up for himself, (with the thought), ‘I’ll enjoy this after death’—
an7.52:5.2 | S: when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the gods of the four great kings. | T: on the break-up of the body, after death, he reappears in the company of the Four Great Kings.
an7.52:5.3 | S: When that deed, success, glory, and sovereignty is spent they return to this place. | T: Then, having exhausted that action, that power, that status, that sovereignty, he is a returner, coming back to this world.
an7.52:6.1 | S: Next, take the case of a someone who gives a gift not as an investment, their mind not tied to it, not expecting to keep it, and not thinking, ‘I’ll enjoy this in my next life.’ | T: “Then there is the case of a person who gives a gift not seeking his own profit, not with a mind attached (to the reward), not seeking to store up for himself, nor (with the thought), ‘I’ll enjoy this after death.’
an7.52:6.2 | S: But they give a gift thinking, ‘It’s good to give.’ … | T: Instead, he gives a gift with the thought, ‘Giving is good.’ He gives his gift—food, drink, clothing, a vehicle; a garland, perfume, & ointment; bedding, shelter, & a lamp—to a contemplative or a brahman. What do you think, Sāriputta? Might a person give such a gift as this?” “Yes, lord.” “Having given this gift with the thought, ‘Giving is good,’ on the break-up of the body, after death, he reappears in the company of the Devas of the Thirty-three. Then, having exhausted that action, that power, that status, that sovereignty, he is a returner, coming back to this world. “Or, instead of thinking, ‘Giving is good,’
an7.52:7.2 | S: They give a gift thinking, ‘Giving was practiced by my father and my father’s father. It would not be right for me to abandon this family custom.’ … | T: he gives a gift with the thought, ‘This was given in the past, done in the past, by my father & grandfather. It would not be right for me to let this old family custom be discontinued’… on the break-up of the body, after death, he reappears in the company of the Devas of the Hours. Then, having exhausted that action, that power, that status, that sovereignty, he is a returner, coming back to this world.
an7.52:8.2 | S: They give a gift thinking, ‘I cook, they don’t. It wouldn’t be right for me to not give to them.’ … | T: “Or, instead… he gives a gift with the thought, ‘I am well-off. These are not well-off. It would not be right for me, being well-off, not to give a gift to those who are not well-off’ … on the break-up of the body, after death, he reappears in the company of the Contented Devas. Then, having exhausted that action, that power, that status, that sovereignty, he is a returner, coming back to this world.
an7.52:9.1 | P: Napi ‘ahaṁ pacāmi, ime na pacanti, nārahāmi pacanto apacantānaṁ dānaṁ adātun’ti dānaṁ deti; | T: “Or, instead…
an7.52:9.2 | S: They give a gift thinking, ‘The ancient brahmin seers were Aṭṭhaka, Vāmaka, Vāmadeva, Vessāmitta, Yamadaggi, Aṅgīrasa, Bhāradvāja, Vāseṭṭha, Kassapa, and Bhagu. | T: he gives a gift with the thought, ‘Just as there were the great sacrifices of the sages of the past—Aṭṭhaka, Vāmaka, Vāmadeva, Vessāmitta, Yamadaggi, Aṇgīrasa, Bhāradvāja, Vāseṭṭha, Kassapa, & Bhagu—
an7.52:9.3 | S: Just as they performed great sacrifices, I will share a gift.’ … | T: in the same way will this be my distribution of gifts’ … on the break-up of the body, after death, he reappears in the company of the Devas who Delight in Creation. Then, having exhausted that action, that power, that status, that sovereignty, he is a returner, coming back to this world.
an7.52:10.1 | P: Napi ‘yathā tesaṁ pubbakānaṁ isīnaṁ tāni mahāyaññāni ahesuṁ, seyyathidaṁ— | T: “Or, instead…
an7.52:10.3 | S: They give a gift thinking, ‘When giving this gift my mind becomes clear, and I become happy and joyful.’ … | T: he gives a gift with the thought, ‘When this gift of mine is given, it makes the mind serene. Gratification & joy arise’ … on the break-up of the body, after death, he reappears in the company of the Devas Wielding power over the creations of others. Then, having exhausted that action, that power, that status, that sovereignty, he is a returner, coming back to this world.
an7.52:11.1 | S: They don’t give a gift thinking, ‘When giving this gift my mind becomes clear, and I become happy and joyful.’ | T: “Or, instead of thinking, ‘When this gift of mine is given, it makes the mind serene. Gratification & joy arise,’ he gives a gift with the thought,
an7.52:11.2 | S: But they give a gift thinking, ‘This is an adornment and requisite for the mind.’ | T: ‘This is an ornament for the mind, a support for the mind.’
an7.52:11.3 | S: They give to ascetics or brahmins such things as food, drink, clothing, vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; and bed, house, and lighting. | T: He gives his gift—food, drink, clothing, a vehicle; a garland, perfume, & ointment; bedding, shelter, & a lamp—to a contemplative or a brahman.
an7.52:11.4 | S: What do you think, Sāriputta, don’t some people give gifts in this way?” | T: What do you think, Sāriputta? Might a person give such a gift as this?”
an7.52:11.5 | S: “Yes, sir.” | T: “Yes, lord.”
an7.52:12.1 | S: “Sāriputta, someone who gives gifts, not for any other reason, | T: “Having given this, not seeking his own profit,
an7.52:12.2 | P: na patibaddhacitto dānaṁ deti; | T: not with a mind attached (to the reward),
an7.52:12.3 | P: na sannidhipekho dānaṁ deti; | T: not seeking to store up for himself,
an7.52:12.4 | P: na ‘imaṁ pecca paribhuñjissāmī’ti dānaṁ deti; | T: nor (with the thought), ‘I’ll enjoy this after death,’
an7.52:12.5 | P: napi ‘sāhu dānan’ti dānaṁ deti; | T: —nor with the thought, ‘Giving is good,’
an7.52:12.6 | P: napi ‘dinnapubbaṁ katapubbaṁ pitupitāmahehi na arahāmi porāṇaṁ kulavaṁsaṁ hāpetun’ti dānaṁ deti; | T: —nor with the thought, ‘This was given in the past, done in the past, by my father & grandfather. It would not be right for me to let this old family custom be discontinued,’
an7.52:12.7 | P: napi ‘ahaṁ pacāmi, ime na pacanti, nārahāmi pacanto apacantānaṁ dānaṁ adātun’ti dānaṁ deti; | T: —nor with the thought, ‘I am well-off. These are not well-off. It would not be right for me, being well-off, not to give a gift to those who are not well-off,’
an7.52:12.8 | P: napi ‘yathā tesaṁ pubbakānaṁ isīnaṁ tāni mahāyaññāni ahesuṁ, seyyathidaṁ— | T: —nor with the thought, ‘Just as there were the great sacrifices of the sages of the past—
an7.52:12.9 | P: aṭṭhakassa vāmakassa vāmadevassa vessāmittassa yamadaggino aṅgīrasassa bhāradvājassa vāseṭṭhassa kassapassa bhaguno, evaṁ me ayaṁ dānasaṁvibhāgo bhavissatī’ti dānaṁ deti; | T: Aṭṭhaka, Vāmaka, Vāmadeva, Vessāmitta, Yamadaggi, Aṇgīrasa, Bhāradvāja, Vāseṭṭha, Kassapa, & Bhagu—in the same way this will be my distribution of gifts,’
an7.52:12.10 | P: napi ‘imaṁ me dānaṁ dadato cittaṁ pasīdati, attamanatā somanassaṁ upajāyatī’ti dānaṁ deti; | T: —nor with the thought, ‘When this gift of mine is given, it makes the mind serene. Gratification & joy arise,’
an7.52:12.11 | S: but thinking, ‘This is an adornment and requisite for the mind’, | T: —but with the thought, ‘This is an ornament for the mind, a support for the mind’—
an7.52:12.12 | S: when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn among the gods of the Divinity’s host. | T: on the break-up of the body, after death, he reappears in the company of Brahmā’s Retinue.
an7.52:12.13 | S: When that deed, success, glory, and sovereignty is spent they are a non-returner; they do not return to this place. | T: Then, having exhausted that action, that power, that status, that sovereignty, he is a non-returner. He does not come back to this world.
an7.52:13.1 | S: This is the cause, this is the reason why someone gives a gift and it is not very fruitful or beneficial, | T: “This, Sāriputta, is the cause, this is the reason, why a person gives a gift of a certain sort and it does not bear great fruit or great benefit,
an7.52:13.2 | S: while someone else gives exactly the same gift and it is very fruitful and beneficial.” | T: whereas another person gives a gift of the same sort and it bears great fruit and great benefit.”

## mn60
mn60:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: I have heard that on one occasion,
mn60:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he arrived at a village of the Kosalan brahmins named Sālā. | T: when the Blessed One was on a wandering tour among the Kosalans with a large Saṅgha of monks, he arrived at the brahman village of the Kosalans called Sāla.
mn60:2.1 | S: The brahmins and householders of Sālā heard: | T: The brahman householders heard,
mn60:2.2 | S: “It seems the ascetic Gotama—a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family—wandering in the land of the Kosalans has arrived at Sālā, together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants. | T: “Master Gotama the contemplative—the son of the Sakyans, having gone forth from the Sakyan clan—on a wandering tour among the Kosalans with a large Saṅgha of monks—has arrived at Sāla.
mn60:2.3 | S: He has this good reputation: | T: And of that master Gotama this fine reputation has spread:
mn60:2.4 | S: ‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ | T: ‘He is indeed a Blessed One, worthy & rightly self-awakened, consummate in clear-knowing & conduct, well-gone, an expert with regard to the cosmos, unexcelled trainer of people fit to be tamed, teacher of devas & human beings, awakened, blessed.
mn60:2.5 | S: He has realized with his own insight this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—and he makes it known to others. | T: He makes known—having realized it through direct knowledge—this world with its devas, Māras, & Brahmās, this generation with its contemplatives & brahmans, its royalty & commonfolk;
mn60:2.6 | S: He teaches Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. | T: he explains the Dhamma admirable in the beginning, admirable in the middle, admirable in the end; he expounds the holy life both in its particulars & in its essence, entirely perfect, surpassingly pure.
mn60:2.7 | S: It’s good to see such perfected ones.” | T: It is good to see such a worthy one.’”
mn60:3.1 | S: Then the brahmins and householders of Sālā went up to the Buddha. Before sitting down to one side, some bowed, some exchanged greetings and polite conversation, some held up their cupped palms toward the Buddha, some announced their name and clan, while some kept silent. The Buddha said to them: | T: So the brahman householders of Sāla went to the Blessed One. On arrival, some of them bowed down to the Blessed One and sat to one side. Some of them exchanged courteous greetings with him and, after an exchange of friendly greetings & courtesies, sat to one side. Some of them sat to one side having saluted him with their hands palm-to-palm over their hearts. Some of them sat to one side having announced their name & clan. Some of them sat to one side in silence. As they were sitting there, the Blessed One asked them,
mn60:4.1 | S: “So, householders, is there any teacher you’re happy with, in whom you have acquired grounded faith?” | T: “Householders, is there any teacher agreeable to you, in whom you have found grounded conviction?” “No, lord, there is no teacher agreeable to us, in whom we have found grounded conviction.”
mn60:4.2 | S: “No, sir.” | T: (none)
mn60:4.3 | S: “Since you haven’t found a teacher you’re happy with, you should undertake and implement this sure bet teaching. | T: “As you have not found an agreeable teacher, you should adopt and practice this safe-bet teaching, for this safe-bet teaching—when accepted and adopted—
mn60:4.4 | S: For when the sure bet teaching is undertaken, it will be for your lasting welfare and happiness. | T: will be to your long-term welfare & happiness.
mn60:4.5 | S: And what is the sure bet teaching? | T: “And what is the safe-bet teaching?
mn60:5.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: | T: Existence & Non-existence A. “There are some contemplatives & brahmans who hold this doctrine, hold this view:
mn60:5.2 | S: ‘There’s no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There’s no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There’s no afterlife. There’s no such thing as mother and father, or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there’s no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ | T: ‘There is nothing given, nothing offered, nothing sacrificed. There is no fruit or result of good or bad actions. There is no this world, no next world, no mother, no father, no spontaneously reborn beings; no contemplatives or brahmans who, faring rightly and practicing rightly, proclaim this world and the next after having directly known and realized it for themselves.’
mn60:6.1 | S: And there are some ascetics and brahmins whose doctrine directly contradicts this. | T: B. “Some contemplatives & brahmans, speaking in direct opposition to those contemplatives & brahmans,
mn60:6.2 | S: They say: | T: say this:
mn60:6.3 | S: ‘There is meaning in giving, sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother and father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ | T: ‘There is what is given, what is offered, what is sacrificed. There are fruits & results of good & bad actions. There is this world & the next world. There is mother & father. There are spontaneously reborn beings; there are contemplatives & brahmans who, faring rightly & practicing rightly, proclaim this world & the next after having directly known & realized it for themselves.’ “What do you think, householders? Don’t these contemplatives & brahmans speak in direct opposition to each other?” “Yes, lord.” A1. “Now, householders, of those contemplatives & brahmans who hold this doctrine, hold this view—’There is nothing given, nothing offered, nothing sacrificed. There is no fruit or result of good or bad actions. There is no this world, no next world, no mother, no father, no spontaneously reborn beings; no contemplatives or brahmans who, faring rightly and practicing rightly, proclaim this world and the next after having directly known and realized it for themselves’—
mn60:6.4 | S: What do you think, householders? | T: (none)
mn60:6.5 | S: Don’t these doctrines directly contradict each other?” | T: (none)
mn60:6.6 | S: “Yes, sir.” | T: (none)
mn60:7.1 | S: “Since this is so, consider those ascetics and brahmins whose view is that | T: (none)
mn60:7.2 | S: there’s no meaning in giving, etc. | T: (none)
mn60:7.3 | S: You can expect that they will shun good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and undertake and implement bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: it can be expected that, shunning these three skillful activities—good bodily conduct, good verbal conduct, good mental conduct—they will adopt & practice these three unskillful activities: bad bodily conduct, bad verbal conduct, bad mental conduct.
mn60:7.4 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn60:7.5 | S: Because those ascetics and brahmins don’t see that unskillful qualities are full of drawbacks, sordidness, and corruption, or that skillful qualities have the benefit and cleansing power of renunciation. | T: Because those venerable contemplatives & brahmans do not see, in unskillful activities, the drawbacks, the degradation, and the defilement; nor in skillful activities the rewards of renunciation, resembling cleansing.
mn60:8.1 | S: Moreover, since there actually is another world, their view that there is no other world is wrong view. | T: A2. “Because there actually is the next world, the view of one who thinks, ‘There is no next world’ is his wrong view.
mn60:8.2 | S: Since there actually is another world, their thought that there is no other world is wrong purpose. | T: Because there actually is the next world, when he is resolved that ‘There is no next world,’ that is his wrong resolve.
mn60:8.3 | S: Since there actually is another world, their speech that there is no other world is wrong speech. | T: Because there actually is the next world, when he speaks the statement, ‘There is no next world,’ that is his wrong speech.
mn60:8.4 | S: Since there actually is another world, in saying that there is no other world they contradict those perfected ones who know the other world. | T: Because there actually is the next world, when he says that ‘There is no next world,’ he makes himself an opponent to those arahants who know the next world.
mn60:8.5 | S: Since there actually is another world, in persuading another that there is no other world they are persuading them to accept an untrue teaching. | T: Because there actually is the next world, when he persuades another that ‘There is no next world,’ that is persuasion in what is not true Dhamma. And in that persuasion in what is not true Dhamma,
mn60:8.6 | S: And on account of that they glorify themselves and put others down. | T: he exalts himself and disparages others.
mn60:8.7 | S: So they give up their former ethical conduct and are established in unethical conduct. | T: Whatever good habituation he previously had is abandoned,
mn60:8.8 | S: And that is how these many bad, unskillful qualities come to be with wrong view as condition—wrong view, wrong purpose, wrong speech, contradicting the noble ones, persuading others to accept untrue teachings, and glorifying oneself and putting others down. | T: while bad habituation is manifested. And this wrong view, wrong resolve, wrong speech, opposition to the arahants, persuasion in what is not true Dhamma, exaltation of self, & disparagement of others: These many evil, unskillful activities come into play, in dependence on wrong view.
mn60:9.1 | S: A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: | T: A3. “With regard to this, an observant person considers thus:
mn60:9.2 | S: ‘If there is no other world, when this individual person’s body breaks up they will keep themselves safe. | T: ‘If there is no next world, then—with the breakup of the body, after death—this venerable person has made himself safe.
mn60:9.3 | S: And if there is another world, when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: But if there is the next world, then this venerable person—on the breakup of the body, after death—will reappear in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.
mn60:9.4 | S: But let us grant that those who say that there is no other world are correct. | T: Even if we didn’t speak of the next world, and there weren’t the true statement of those venerable contemplatives & brahmans,
mn60:9.5 | S: Regardless, that individual is still criticized by sensible people in this very life as being an immoral individual of wrong view, a nihilist.’ | T: this venerable person is still criticized in the here & now by the observant as a person of bad habits & wrong view: one who holds to a doctrine of non-existence.’
mn60:9.6 | S: But if there really is another world, they hold a losing hand on both counts. | T: If there really is a next world,
mn60:9.7 | S: For they are criticized by sensible people in this very life, and when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: then this venerable person has made a bad throw twice: in that he is criticized by the observant here & now, and in that—with the breakup of the body, after death—he will reappear in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.
mn60:9.8 | S: They have wrongly undertaken this sure bet teaching in such a way that it encompasses the positive outcomes of one side only, leaving out the skillful premise. | T: Thus this safe-bet teaching, when poorly grasped & poorly adopted by him, covers (only) one side, and leaves behind the possibility of the skillful.
mn60:10.1 | S: Since this is so, consider those ascetics and brahmins whose view is that | T: B1. “Now, householders, of those contemplatives & brahmans who hold this doctrine, hold this view—
mn60:10.2 | S: there is meaning in giving, etc. | T: ’There is what is given, what is offered, what is sacrificed. There are fruits & results of good & bad actions. There is this world & the next world. There is mother & father. There are spontaneously reborn beings; there are contemplatives & brahmans who, faring rightly & practicing rightly, proclaim this world & the next after having directly known & realized it for themselves’—
mn60:10.3 | S: You can expect that they will shun bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and undertake and implement good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: it can be expected that, shunning these three unskillful activities—bad bodily conduct, bad verbal conduct, bad mental conduct—they will adopt & practice these three skillful activities: good bodily conduct, good verbal conduct, good mental conduct.
mn60:10.4 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn60:10.5 | S: Because those ascetics and brahmins see that unskillful qualities are full of drawbacks, sordidness, and corruption, and that skillful qualities have the benefit and cleansing power of renunciation. | T: Because those venerable contemplatives & brahmans see in unskillful activities the drawbacks, the degradation, and the defilement; and in skillful activities the rewards of renunciation, resembling cleansing.
mn60:11.1 | S: Moreover, since there actually is another world, their view that there is another world is right view. | T: B2. “Because there actually is the next world, the view of one who thinks, ‘There is a next world’ is his right view.
mn60:11.2 | S: Since there actually is another world, their thought that there is another world is right purpose. | T: Because there actually is the next world, when he is resolved that ‘There is a next world,’ that is his right resolve.
mn60:11.3 | S: Since there actually is another world, their speech that there is another world is right speech. | T: Because there actually is the next world, when he speaks the statement, ‘There is a next world,’ that is his right speech.
mn60:11.4 | S: Since there actually is another world, in saying that there is another world they don’t contradict those perfected ones who know the other world. | T: Because there actually is the next world, when he says that ‘There is a next world,’ he doesn’t make himself an opponent to those arahants who know the next world. Because there actually is the next world,
mn60:11.5 | S: Since there actually is another world, in persuading another that there is another world they are persuading them to accept a true teaching. | T: when he persuades another that ‘There is a next world,’ that is persuasion in what is true Dhamma. And in that persuasion in what is true Dhamma,
mn60:11.6 | S: And on account of that they don’t glorify themselves or put others down. | T: he doesn’t exalt himself or disparage others.
mn60:11.7 | S: So they give up their former unethical conduct and are established in ethical conduct. | T: Whatever bad habituation he previously had is abandoned, while good habituation is manifested.
mn60:11.8 | S: And that is how these many skillful qualities come to be with right view as condition—right view, right purpose, right speech, not contradicting the noble ones, persuading others to accept true teachings, and not glorifying oneself or putting others down. | T: And this right view, right resolve, right speech, non-opposition to the arahants, persuasion in what is true Dhamma, non-exaltation of self, & non-disparagement of others: These many skillful activities come into play, in dependence on right view.
mn60:12.1 | S: A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: | T: B3. “With regard to this, an observant person considers thus:
mn60:12.2 | S: ‘If there is another world, when this individual’s body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. | T: ‘If there is the next world, then this venerable person—on the breakup of the body, after death—will reappear in a good destination, a heavenly world.
mn60:12.3 | S: But let us grant that those who say that there is no other world are correct. | T: Even if we didn’t speak of the next world, and there weren’t the true statement of those venerable contemplatives & brahmans,
mn60:12.4 | S: Regardless, that individual is still praised by sensible people in this very life as being a moral individual of right view, who affirms a positive teaching.’ | T: this venerable person is still praised in the here & now by the observant as a person of good habits & right view: one who holds to a doctrine of existence.’
mn60:12.5 | S: So if there really is another world, they hold a winning hand on both counts. | T: If there really is a next world,
mn60:12.6 | S: For they are praised by sensible people in this very life, and when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. | T: then this venerable person has made a good throw twice, in that he is praised by the observant here & now; and in that—with the breakup of the body, after death—he will reappear in a good destination, a heavenly world.
mn60:12.7 | S: They have rightly undertaken this sure bet teaching in such a way that it encompasses the positive outcomes of both sides, leaving out the unskillful premise. | T: Thus this safe-bet teaching, when well grasped & adopted by him, covers both sides, and leaves behind the possibility of the unskillful.
mn60:13.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: | T: Action & Non-action A. “There are some contemplatives & brahmans who hold this doctrine, hold this view:
mn60:13.2 | S: ‘The one who acts does nothing wrong when they punish, mutilate, torture, aggrieve, oppress, intimidate, or when they encourage others to do the same. They do nothing wrong when they kill, steal, break into houses, plunder wealth, steal from isolated buildings, commit highway robbery, commit adultery, and lie. | T: ‘In acting or getting others to act, in mutilating or getting others to mutilate, in torturing or getting others to torture, in inflicting sorrow or in getting others to inflict sorrow, in tormenting or getting others to torment, in intimidating or getting others to intimidate, in taking life, taking what is not given, breaking into houses, plundering wealth, committing burglary, ambushing highways, committing adultery, speaking falsehood—
mn60:13.3 | S: If you were to reduce all the living creatures of this earth to one heap and mass of flesh with a razor-edged chakram, no evil comes of that, and no outcome of evil. | T: one does no evil. If with a razor-edged disk one were to turn all the living beings on this earth to a single heap of flesh, a single pile of flesh, there would be no evil from that cause, no coming of evil.
mn60:13.4 | S: If you were to go along the south bank of the Ganges killing, mutilating, and torturing, and encouraging others to do the same, no evil comes of that, and no outcome of evil. | T: Even if one were to go along the right bank of the Ganges, killing and getting others to kill, mutilating and getting others to mutilate, torturing and getting others to torture, there would be no evil from that cause, no coming of evil.
mn60:13.5 | S: If you were to go along the north bank of the Ganges giving and sacrificing and encouraging others to do the same, no merit comes of that, and no outcome of merit. | T: Even if one were to go along the left bank of the Ganges, giving and getting others to give, making sacrifices and getting others to make sacrifices, there would be no merit from that cause, no coming of merit.
mn60:13.6 | S: In giving, self-control, restraint, and truthfulness there is no merit or outcome of merit.’ | T: Through generosity, self-control, restraint, and truthful speech there is no merit from that cause, no coming of merit.’
mn60:14.1 | S: And there are some ascetics and brahmins whose doctrine directly contradicts this. They say: | T: B. “Some contemplatives & brahmans, speaking in direct opposition to those contemplatives & brahmans, say this:
mn60:14.2 | S: ‘The one who acts does a bad deed when they punish, mutilate, torture, aggrieve, oppress, intimidate, or when they encourage others to do the same. They do a bad deed when they kill, steal, break into houses, plunder wealth, steal from isolated buildings, commit highway robbery, commit adultery, and lie. | T: ‘In acting or getting others to act, in mutilating or getting others to mutilate, in torturing or getting others to torture, in inflicting sorrow or in getting others to inflict sorrow, in tormenting or getting others to torment, in intimidating or getting others to intimidate, in taking life, taking what is not given, breaking into houses, plundering wealth, committing burglary, ambushing highways, committing adultery, speaking falsehood—
mn60:14.3 | S: If you were to reduce all the living creatures of this earth to one heap and mass of flesh with a razor-edged chakram, evil comes of that, and an outcome of evil. | T: one does evil. If with a razor-edged disk one were to turn all the living beings on this earth to a single heap of flesh, a single pile of flesh, there would be evil from that cause, there would be a coming of evil.
mn60:14.4 | S: If you were to go along the south bank of the Ganges killing, mutilating, and torturing, and encouraging others to do the same, evil comes of that, and an outcome of evil. | T: If one were to go along the right bank of the Ganges, killing and getting others to kill, mutilating and getting others to mutilate, torturing and getting others to torture, there would be evil from that cause, there would be a coming of evil.
mn60:14.5 | S: If you were to go along the north bank of the Ganges giving and sacrificing and encouraging others to do the same, merit comes of that, and an outcome of merit. | T: If one were to go along the left bank of the Ganges, giving and getting others to give, making sacrifices and getting others to make sacrifices, there would be merit from that cause, there would be a coming of merit.
mn60:14.6 | S: In giving, self-control, restraint, and truthfulness there is merit and outcome of merit.’ | T: Through generosity, self-control, restraint, and truthful speech there is merit from that cause, there is a coming of merit.’
mn60:14.7 | S: What do you think, householders? | T: “What do you think, householders?
mn60:14.8 | S: Don’t these doctrines directly contradict each other?” | T: Don’t these contemplatives & brahmans speak in direct opposition to each other?”
mn60:14.9 | S: “Yes, sir.” | T: “Yes, lord.”
mn60:15.1 | S: “Since this is so, consider those ascetics and brahmins whose view is that | T: A1. “Now, householders, of those contemplatives & brahmans who hold this doctrine, hold this view—
mn60:15.2 | S: the one who acts does nothing wrong when they punish, etc. | T: ’In acting or getting others to act, in mutilating or getting others to mutilate, in torturing or getting others to torture… one does no evil …
mn60:15.4 | P: Dakkhiṇañcepi gaṅgāya tīraṁ gaccheyya hananto ghātento …pe… dānena damena saṁyamena saccavajjena natthi puññaṁ, natthi puññassa āgamo’ti | T: Through generosity, self-control, restraint,
mn60:15.5 | S: You can expect that they will shun good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and undertake and implement bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: and truthful speech there is no merit from that cause, no coming of merit’—it can be expected that, shunning these three skillful activities—good bodily conduct, good verbal conduct, good mental conduct—they will adopt & practice these three unskillful activities: bad bodily conduct, bad verbal conduct, bad mental conduct.
mn60:15.6 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn60:15.7 | S: Because those ascetics and brahmins don’t see that unskillful qualities are full of drawbacks, sordidness, and corruption, or that skillful qualities have the benefit and cleansing power of renunciation. | T: Because those venerable contemplatives & brahmans do not see, in unskillful activities, the drawbacks, the degradation, and the defilement; nor in skillful activities the rewards of renunciation, resembling cleansing.
mn60:16.1 | S: Moreover, since action actually does have an effect, their view that action is ineffective is wrong view. | T: A2. “Because there actually is action, the view of one who thinks, ‘There is no action’ is his wrong view.
mn60:16.2 | S: Since action actually does have an effect, their thought that action is ineffective is wrong purpose. | T: Because there actually is action, when he is resolved that ‘There is no action,’ that is his wrong resolve.
mn60:16.3 | S: Since action actually does have an effect, their speech that action is ineffective is wrong speech. | T: Because there actually is action, when he speaks the statement, ‘There is no action,’ that is his wrong speech. Because there actually is action, when he says that
mn60:16.4 | S: Since action actually does have an effect, in saying that action is ineffective they contradict those perfected ones who teach that action is effective. | T: ‘There is no action,’ he makes himself an opponent to those arahants who teach action.
mn60:16.5 | S: Since action actually does have an effect, in persuading another that action is ineffective they are persuading them to accept an untrue teaching. | T: Because there actually is action, when he persuades another that ‘There is no action,’ that is persuasion in what is not true Dhamma. And in that persuasion in what is not true Dhamma,
mn60:16.6 | S: And on account of that they glorify themselves and put others down. | T: he exalts himself and disparages others.
mn60:16.7 | S: So they give up their former ethical conduct and are established in unethical conduct. | T: Whatever good habituation he previously had is abandoned,
mn60:16.8 | S: And that is how these many bad, unskillful qualities come to be with wrong view as condition—wrong view, wrong purpose, wrong speech, contradicting the noble ones, persuading others to accept untrue teachings, and glorifying oneself and putting others down. | T: while bad habituation is manifested. And this wrong view, wrong resolve, wrong speech, opposition to the arahants, persuasion in what is not true Dhamma, exaltation of self, & disparagement of others: These many evil, unskillful activities come into play, in dependence on wrong view.
mn60:17.1 | S: A sensible person reflects on this matter in this way: | T: A3. “With regard to this, an observant person considers thus:
mn60:17.2 | S: ‘If there is no effective action, when this individual’s body breaks up they will keep themselves safe. | T: ‘If there is no action, then—with the breakup of the body, after death—this venerable person has made himself safe.
mn60:17.3 | S: And if there is effective action, when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: But if there is action, then this venerable person—on the breakup of the body, after death—will reappear in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.
mn60:17.4 | S: But let us grant that those who say that there is no effective action are correct. | T: Even if we didn’t speak of action, and there weren’t the true statement of those venerable contemplatives & brahmans,
mn60:17.5 | S: Regardless, that individual is still criticized by sensible people in this very life as being an immoral individual of wrong view, one who denies the efficacy of action.’ | T: this venerable person is still criticized in the here & now by the observant as a person of bad habits & wrong view: one who holds to a doctrine of non-action.’
mn60:17.6 | S: But if there really is effective action, they hold a losing hand on both counts. | T: If there really is action,
mn60:17.7 | S: For they are criticized by sensible people in this very life, and when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: then this venerable person has made a bad throw twice: in that he is criticized by the observant here & now; and in that—with the breakup of the body, after death—he will reappear in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.
mn60:17.8 | S: They have wrongly undertaken this sure bet teaching in such a way that it encompasses the positive outcomes of one side only, leaving out the skillful premise. | T: Thus this safe-bet teaching, when poorly grasped & poorly adopted by him, covers (only) one side, and leaves behind the possibility of the skillful.
mn60:18.1 | S: Since this is so, consider those ascetics and brahmins whose view is that | T: B1. “Now, householders, of those contemplatives & brahmans who hold this doctrine, hold this view—
mn60:18.2 | S: the one who acts does a bad deed when they punish, etc. | T: ’In acting or getting others to act, in mutilating or getting others to mutilate, in torturing or getting others to torture… one does evil.…
mn60:18.5 | P: Uttarañcepi gaṅgāya tīraṁ gaccheyya dadanto dāpento, yajanto yajāpento, atthi tatonidānaṁ puññaṁ, atthi puññassa āgamo. Dānena damena saṁyamena saccavajjena atthi puññaṁ, atthi puññassa āgamo’ti | T: Through generosity, self-control, restraint,
mn60:18.6 | S: You can expect that they will shun bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and undertake and implement good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: and truthful speech there is merit from that cause, there is a coming of merit’—it can be expected that, shunning these three unskillful activities—bad bodily conduct, bad verbal conduct, bad mental conduct—they will adopt & practice these three skillful activities: good bodily conduct, good verbal conduct, good mental conduct.
mn60:18.7 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn60:18.8 | S: Because those ascetics and brahmins see that unskillful qualities are full of drawbacks, sordidness, and corruption, and that skillful qualities have the benefit and cleansing power of renunciation. | T: Because those venerable contemplatives & brahmans see in unskillful activities the drawbacks, the degradation, and the defilement; and in skillful activities the rewards of renunciation, resembling cleansing.
mn60:19.1 | S: Moreover, since action actually does have an effect, their view that action is effective is right view. | T: B2. “Because there actually is action, the view of one who thinks, ‘There is action’ is his right view.
