## an7.49
an7.49:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, these seven perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are very fruitful and beneficial. They have freedom from death as their objective and culmination. | T: “Monks, these seven perceptions, when developed & pursued, are of great fruit, of great benefit. They gain a footing in the deathless, have the deathless as their final end.
an7.49:1.2 | S: What seven? | T: Which seven?
an7.49:1.3 | S: The perceptions of ugliness, death, repulsiveness of food, dissatisfaction with the whole world, impermanence, suffering in impermanence, and not-self in suffering. | T: The perception of the unattractive, the perception of death, the perception of loathsomeness in food, the perception of distaste for every world, the perception of inconstancy, the perception of stress in what is inconstant, the perception of not-self in what is stressful.
an7.49:1.4 | S: These seven perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are very fruitful and beneficial. They have freedom from death as their objective and culmination. | T: (none)
an7.49:2.1 | S: ‘When the perception of ugliness is developed and cultivated it’s very fruitful and beneficial. It has freedom from death as its objective and culmination.’ | T: [1] “‘The perception of the unattractive, when developed & pursued, is of great fruit, of great benefit. It gains a footing in the deathless, has the deathless as its final end’:
an7.49:2.2 | S: That’s what I said, but why did I say it? | T: Thus was it said. In reference to what was it said?
an7.49:2.3 | S: When a mendicant often meditates with a mind reinforced with the perception of ugliness, their mind draws back from sexual intercourse. They shrink away, turn aside, and don’t get drawn into it. And either equanimity or revulsion become stabilized. | T: “When a monk’s awareness often remains steeped in the perception of the unattractive, his mind shrinks away from the completion of the sexual act, bends away, pulls back, and is not drawn in, and either equanimity or loathing take a stance.
an7.49:2.4 | S: It’s like a chicken’s feather or a scrap of sinew thrown in a fire. It shrivels up, shrinks, rolls up, and doesn’t stretch out. | T: Just as a cock’s feather or a piece of tendon, when thrown into a fire, shrinks away, bends away, pulls back, and is not drawn in;
an7.49:2.5 | S: In the same way, when a mendicant often meditates with a mind reinforced with the perception of ugliness, their mind draws back from sexual intercourse. … | T: in the same way, when a monk’s awareness often remains steeped in the perception of the unattractive, his mind shrinks away from the completion of the sexual act, bends away, pulls back, and is not drawn in, and either equanimity or loathing take a stance.
an7.49:3.1 | S: If a mendicant often meditates with a mind reinforced with the perception of ugliness, but their mind is drawn to sexual intercourse, and not repulsed, | T: If, when a monk’s awareness often remains steeped in the perception of the unattractive, his mind inclines to the completion of the sexual act, or if non-loathing takes a stance,
an7.49:3.2 | S: they should know: ‘My perception of ugliness is undeveloped. I don’t have any distinction higher than before. I haven’t attained a fruit of development.’ | T: then he should realize, ‘I have not developed the perception of the unattractive; there is no step-by-step distinction in me; I have not arrived at the fruit of (mental) development.’
an7.49:3.3 | S: In this way they are aware of the situation. | T: In that way he is alert there.
an7.49:3.4 | S: But if a mendicant often meditates with a mind reinforced with the perception of ugliness, their mind draws back from sexual intercourse … | T: But if, when a monk’s awareness often remains steeped in the perception of the unattractive, his mind shrinks away from the completion of the sexual act, bends away, pulls back, and is not drawn in, and either equanimity or loathing take a stance,
an7.49:3.5 | S: they should know: ‘My perception of ugliness is well developed. I have realized a distinction higher than before. I have attained a fruit of development.’ | T: then he should realize, ‘I have developed the perception of the unattractive; there is a step-by-step distinction in me; I have arrived at the fruit of (mental) development.’
an7.49:3.6 | S: In this way they are aware of the situation. | T: In that way he is alert there.
an7.49:3.7 | S: ‘When the perception of ugliness is developed and cultivated it’s very fruitful and beneficial. It has freedom from death as its objective and culmination.’ | T: “‘The perception of the unattractive, when developed & pursued, is of great fruit, of great benefit. It gains a footing in the deathless, has the deathless as its final end’:
an7.49:3.8 | S: That’s what I said, and this is why I said it. | T: Thus was it said, and in reference to this was it said.
an7.49:4.1 | S: ‘When the perception of death is developed and cultivated it’s very fruitful and beneficial. It has freedom from death as its objective and culmination.’ That’s what I said, but why did I say it? | T: [2] “‘The perception of death, when developed & pursued, is of great fruit, of great benefit. It gains a footing in the deathless, has the deathless as its final end’: Thus was it said. In reference to what was it said?
an7.49:4.2 | S: When a mendicant often meditates with a mind reinforced with the perception of death, their mind draws back from desire to be reborn. … | T: “When a monk’s awareness often remains steeped in the perception of death, his mind shrinks away from fervor for life, bends away, pulls back, and is not drawn in, and either equanimity or loathing take a stance. Just as a cock’s feather or a piece of tendon, when thrown into a fire, shrinks away, bends away, pulls back, and is not drawn in; in the same way, when a monk’s awareness often remains steeped in the perception of death, his mind shrinks away from fervor for life, bends away, pulls back, and is not drawn in, and either equanimity or loathing take a stance. If, when a monk’s awareness often remains steeped in the perception of death, his mind inclines to fervor for life, or if non-loathing takes a stance, then he should realize, ‘I have not developed the perception of death; there is no step-by-step distinction in me; I have not arrived at the fruit of (mental) development.’ In that way he is alert there. But if, when a monk’s awareness often remains steeped in the perception of death, his mind shrinks away from fervor for life, bends away, pulls back, and is not drawn in, and either equanimity or loathing take a stance,
an7.49:5.3 | P: Itiha tattha sampajāno hoti. | T: then he should realize,
an7.49:5.8 | S: That’s what I said, and this is why I said it. | T: (none)
an7.49:6.1 | S: ‘When the perception of the repulsiveness of food is developed and cultivated it’s very fruitful and beneficial. It has freedom from death as its objective and culmination.’ That’s what I said, but why did I say it? | T: ‘I have developed the perception of death; there is a step-by-step distinction in me; I have arrived at the fruit of (mental) development.’ In that way he is alert there. “‘The perception of death, when developed & pursued, is of great fruit, of great benefit. It gains a footing in the deathless, has the deathless as its final end’: Thus was it said, and in reference to this was it said. [3] “‘The perception of loathsomeness in food, when developed & pursued, is of great fruit, of great benefit. It gains a footing in the deathless, has the deathless as its final end’: Thus was it said. In reference to what was it said?
an7.49:6.2 | S: When a mendicant often meditates with a mind reinforced with the perception of the repulsiveness of food, their mind draws back from craving for tastes. … | T: “When a monk’s awareness often remains steeped in the perception of loathsomeness in food, his mind shrinks away from craving for flavors, bends away, pulls back, and is not drawn in, and either equanimity or loathing take a stance. Just as a cock’s feather or a piece of tendon, when thrown into a fire, shrinks away, bends away, pulls back, and is not drawn in; in the same way, when a monk’s awareness often remains steeped in the perception of loathsomeness in food, his mind shrinks away from craving for flavors, bends away, pulls back, and is not drawn in, and either equanimity or loathing take a stance. If, when a monk’s awareness often remains steeped in the perception of loathsomeness in food, his mind inclines to craving for flavors, or if non-loathing takes a stance, then he should realize, ‘I have not developed the perception of loathsomeness in food; there is no step-by-step distinction in me; I have not arrived at the fruit of (mental) development.’ In that way he is alert there. But if, when a monk’s awareness often remains steeped in the perception of loathsomeness in food, his mind shrinks away from craving for flavors, bends away, pulls back, and is not drawn in, and either equanimity or loathing take a stance, then he should realize, ‘I have developed the perception of loathsomeness in food;
an7.49:7.5 | P: veditabbametaṁ, bhikkhave, bhikkhunā ‘subhāvitā me āhāre paṭikūlasaññā, atthi me pubbenāparaṁ viseso, pattaṁ me bhāvanābalan’ti. | T: there is a step-by-step distinction in me;
an7.49:7.8 | S: That’s what I said, and this is why I said it. | T: I have arrived at the fruit of (mental) development.’ In that way he is alert there.
an7.49:8.1 | S: ‘When the perception of dissatisfaction with the whole world is developed and cultivated it’s very fruitful and beneficial. It has freedom from death as its objective and culmination.’ That’s what I said, but why did I say it? | T: “‘The perception of loathsomeness in food, when developed & pursued, is of great fruit, of great benefit. It gains a footing in the deathless, has the deathless as its final end’: Thus was it said, and in reference to this was it said. [4] “‘The perception of distaste for every world, when developed & pursued, is of great fruit, of great benefit. It gains a footing in the deathless, has the deathless as its final end’: Thus was it said. In reference to what was it said?
an7.49:8.3 | S: When a mendicant often meditates with a mind reinforced with the perception of dissatisfaction with the whole world, their mind draws back from the world’s shiny things. … | T: “When a monk’s awareness often remains steeped in the perception of distaste for every world, his mind shrinks away from worldly embellishments, bends away, pulls back, and is not drawn in, and either equanimity or loathing take a stance. Just as a cock’s feather or a piece of tendon, when thrown into a fire, shrinks away, bends away, pulls back, and is not drawn in; in the same way, when a monk’s awareness often remains steeped in the perception of distaste for every world, his mind shrinks away from worldly embellishments, bends away, pulls back, and is not drawn in, and either equanimity or loathing take a stance. If, when a monk’s awareness often remains steeped in the perception of distaste for every world, his mind inclines to worldly embellishments, or if non-loathing takes a stance, then he should realize, ‘I have not developed the perception of distaste for every world; there is no step-by-step distinction in me; I have not arrived at the fruit of (mental) development.’ In that way he is alert there. But if, when a monk’s awareness often remains steeped in the perception of distaste for every world, his mind shrinks away from worldly embellishments, bends away, pulls back, and is not drawn in, and either equanimity or loathing take a stance, then he should realize, ‘I have developed the perception of distaste for every world; there is a step-by-step distinction in me; I have arrived at the fruit of (mental) development.’ In that way he is alert there. “‘The perception of distaste for every world,
an7.49:9.8 | S: That’s what I said, and this is why I said it. | T: (none)
an7.49:10.1 | S: ‘When the perception of impermanence is developed and cultivated it’s very fruitful and beneficial. It has freedom from death as its objective and culmination.’ That’s what I said, but why did I say it? | T: when developed & pursued, is of great fruit, of great benefit. It gains a footing in the deathless, has the deathless as its final end’: Thus was it said, and in reference to this was it said. [5] “‘The perception of inconstancy, when developed & pursued, is of great fruit, of great benefit. It gains a footing in the deathless, has the deathless as its final end’: Thus was it said. In reference to what was it said?
an7.49:10.3 | S: When a mendicant often meditates with a mind reinforced with the perception of impermanence, their mind draws back from possessions, honor, and popularity. … | T: “When a monk’s awareness often remains steeped in the perception of inconstancy, his mind shrinks away from gains, offerings, & fame, bends away, pulls back, and is not drawn in, and either equanimity or loathing take a stance. Just as a cock’s feather or a piece of tendon, when thrown into a fire, shrinks away, bends away, pulls back, and is not drawn in; in the same way, when a monk’s awareness often remains steeped in the perception of inconstancy, his mind shrinks away from gains, offering, & fame, bends away, pulls back, and is not drawn in, and either equanimity or loathing take a stance. If, when a monk’s awareness often remains steeped in the perception of inconstancy, his mind inclines to gains, offering, & fame, or if non-loathing takes a stance, then he should realize, ‘I have not developed the perception of inconstancy; there is no step-by-step distinction in me; I have not arrived at the fruit of (mental) development.’ In that way he is alert there.
an7.49:11.4 | P: Sace pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno aniccasaññāparicitena cetasā bahulaṁ viharato lābhasakkārasiloke cittaṁ patilīyati patikuṭati pativattati, na sampasāriyati upekkhā vā pāṭikulyatā vā saṇṭhāti; | T: But if, when a monk’s awareness often remains steeped in the perception of inconstancy, his mind shrinks away from gains, offering, & fame, bends away, pulls back, and is not drawn in, and either equanimity or loathing take a stance, then he should realize, ‘I have developed the perception of inconstancy; there is a step-by-step distinction in me; I have arrived at the fruit of (mental) development.’ In that way he is alert there. “‘The perception of inconstancy, when developed & pursued, is of great fruit, of great benefit. It gains a footing in the deathless, has the deathless as its final end’: Thus was it said, and in reference to this was it said.
an7.49:11.8 | S: That’s what I said, and this is why I said it. | T: (none)
an7.49:12.1 | S: ‘When the perception of suffering in impermanence is developed and cultivated it’s very fruitful and beneficial. It has freedom from death as its objective and culmination.’ That’s what I said, but why did I say it? | T: [6] “‘The perception of stress in what is inconstant, when developed & pursued, is of great fruit, of great benefit. It gains a footing in the deathless, has the deathless as its final end’: Thus was it said. In reference to what was it said?
an7.49:12.3 | S: When a mendicant often meditates with a mind reinforced with the perception of suffering in impermanence, they establish a keen perception of the danger of sloth, laziness, slackness, negligence, lack of commitment, and failure to review, like a killer with a drawn sword. … | T: “When a monk’s awareness often remains steeped in the perception of stress in what is inconstant, a fierce perception of danger & fear is established in him toward idleness, indolence, laziness, heedlessness, lack of commitment, & lack of reflection, as if toward a murderer with an upraised sword. If, when a monk’s awareness often remains steeped in the perception of stress in what is inconstant, a fierce perception of danger & fear is not established in him toward idleness, indolence, laziness, heedlessness, lack of commitment, & lack of reflection, as if toward a murderer with an upraised sword, then he should realize, ‘I have not developed the perception of stress in what is inconstant; there is no step-by-step distinction in me; I have not arrived at the fruit of (mental) development.’ In that way he is alert there. But if, when a monk’s awareness often remains steeped in the perception of stress in what is inconstant, a fierce perception of danger & fear is established in him toward idleness, indolence, laziness, heedlessness, lack of commitment, & lack of reflection, as if toward a murderer with an upraised sword,
an7.49:13.5 | P: Veditabbametaṁ, bhikkhave, bhikkhunā ‘subhāvitā me anicce dukkhasaññā, atthi me pubbenāparaṁ viseso, pattaṁ me bhāvanābalan’ti. | T: then he should realize, ‘I have developed the perception of stress in what is inconstant; there is a step-by-step distinction in me;
an7.49:13.8 | S: That’s what I said, and this is why I said it. | T: I have arrived at the fruit of (mental) development.’ In that way he is alert there.
an7.49:14.1 | S: ‘When the perception of not-self in suffering is developed and cultivated it’s very fruitful and beneficial. It has freedom from death as its objective and culmination.’ That’s what I said, but why did I say it? | T: “‘The perception of stress in what is inconstant, when developed & pursued, is of great fruit, of great benefit. It gains a footing in the deathless, has the deathless as its final end’: Thus was it said, and in reference to this was it said. [7] “‘The perception of not-self in what is stressful, when developed & pursued, is of great fruit, of great benefit. It gains a footing in the deathless, has the deathless as its final end’: Thus was it said. In reference to what was it said?
an7.49:14.3 | S: When a mendicant often meditates with a mind reinforced with the perception of not-self in suffering, their heart is rid of I-making, mine-making, and conceit for this conscious body and externally for all signs. It has gone beyond discrimination, and is peaceful and well freed. | T: “When a monk’s awareness often remains steeped in the perception of not-self in what is stressful, his heart is devoid of I-making & my-making with regard to this conscious body and externally with regard to all themes, has transcended pride, is at peace, and is well released.
an7.49:15.1 | S: If a mendicant often meditates with a mind reinforced with the perception of not-self in suffering, but their heart is not rid of I-making, mine-making, and conceit for this conscious body and externally for all signs; nor has it gone beyond discrimination, and is not peaceful or well freed, | T: If, when a monk’s awareness often remains steeped in the perception of not-self in what is stressful, his heart is not devoid of I-making & my-making with regard to this conscious body and externally with regard to all themes, has not transcended pride, is not at peace, and is not well released,
an7.49:15.2 | S: they should know: ‘My perception of not-self in suffering is undeveloped. I don’t have any distinction higher than before. I haven’t attained a fruit of development.’ | T: then he should realize, ‘I have not developed the perception of not-self in what is stressful; there is no step-by-step distinction in me; I have not arrived at the fruit of (mental) development.’
an7.49:15.3 | S: In this way they are aware of the situation. | T: In that way he is alert there.
an7.49:16.1 | S: But if a mendicant often meditates with a mind reinforced with the perception of not-self in suffering, and their heart is rid of I-making, mine-making, and conceit for this conscious body and externally for all signs; and it has gone beyond discrimination, and is peaceful and well freed, | T: But if, when a monk’s awareness often remains steeped in the perception of not-self in what is stressful, his heart is devoid of I-making & my-making with regard to this conscious body and externally with regard to all themes, has transcended pride, is at peace, and is well released,
an7.49:16.2 | S: they should know: ‘My perception of not-self in suffering is well developed. I have realized a distinction higher than before. I have attained a fruit of development.’ | T: then he should realize, ‘I have developed the perception of not-self in what is stressful; there is a step-by-step distinction in me; I have arrived at the fruit of (mental) development.’
an7.49:16.3 | S: In this way they are aware of the situation. | T: In that way he is alert there.
an7.49:16.4 | S: ‘When the perception of not-self in suffering is developed and cultivated it’s very fruitful and beneficial. It has freedom from death as its objective and culmination.’ | T: “‘The perception of not-self in what is stressful, when developed & pursued, is of great fruit, of great benefit. It gains a footing in the deathless, has the deathless as its final end’:
an7.49:16.5 | S: That’s what I said, and this is why I said it. | T: Thus was it said, and in reference to this was it said.
an7.49:17.1 | S: These seven perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are very fruitful and beneficial. Their objective and culmination is freedom from death.” | T: “Monks, these seven perceptions, when developed & pursued, are of great fruit, of great benefit. They gain a footing in the deathless, have the deathless as their final end.”

## mn77
mn77:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: (none)
mn77:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground. | T: I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Rājagaha in the Bamboo Forest, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.
mn77:2.1 | S: Now at that time several very well-known wanderers were residing in their monastery in the peacocks’ feeding ground. | T: And on that occasion, many well-known wanderers were staying in the Peacocks’ Sanctuary—
mn77:2.2 | S: They included Annabhāra, Varadhara, Sakuludāyī, and other very well-known wanderers. | T: Annabhāra, Varatara, Sakuludāyin, and many other well-known wanderers.
mn77:3.1 | S: Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Rājagaha for alms. | T: Then early in the morning, the Blessed One adjusted his under robe and—carrying his bowl & robes—went into Rājagaha for alms.
mn77:3.2 | S: Then it occurred to him, | T: The thought occurred to him,
mn77:3.3 | S: “It’s too early to wander for alms in Rājagaha. | T: “It’s still too early to go into Rājagaha for alms.
mn77:3.4 | S: Why don’t I visit the wanderer Sakuludāyī at the monastery for the wanderers in the peacocks’ feeding ground?” | T: What if I were to go to the Peacocks’ Sanctuary, the wanderers’ park, and to approach Sakuludāyin the wanderer?”
mn77:4.1 | S: So the Buddha went to the monastery for the wanderers. | T: So the Blessed One went to the Peacocks’ Sanctuary, the wanderers’ park.
mn77:4.2 | S: Now at that time, Sakuludāyī was sitting together with a large assembly of wanderers making an uproar, a colossal racket. They engaged in all kinds of low talk, such as | T: Now, on that occasion Sakuludāyin the wanderer was sitting with a large following of wanderers who were shouting, making a shrill racket, a great racket, engaged in many kinds of bestial topics of conversation:
mn77:4.3 | S: talk about kings, bandits, and chief ministers; talk about armies, threats, and wars; talk about food, drink, clothes, and beds; talk about garlands and fragrances; talk about family, vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and countries; talk about women and heroes; talk at the street market and the place for water pots; talk about the departed; motley talk; tales of land and sea; and talk about being reborn in this or that place. | T: conversation about kings, robbers, & ministers of state; armies, alarms, & battles; food & drink; clothing, furniture, garlands, & scents; relatives; vehicles; villages, towns, cities, the countryside; women & heroes; the gossip of the street & the well; tales of the dead; tales of diversity, the creation of the world & of the sea; talk of whether things exist or not.
mn77:4.4 | S: Sakuludāyī saw the Buddha coming off in the distance, | T: Sakuludāyin the wanderer saw the Blessed One coming from afar,
mn77:4.5 | S: and hushed his own assembly, | T: and on seeing him, hushed his following:
mn77:4.6 | S: “Be quiet, good fellows, don’t make a sound. | T: “Be quiet, good sirs. Don’t make a sound!
mn77:4.8 | S: Here comes the ascetic Gotama. | T: Here comes the contemplative Gotama.
mn77:4.9 | S: The venerable likes quiet and praises quiet. | T: He is fond of quietude and speaks in praise of quietude.
mn77:4.10 | S: Hopefully if he sees that our assembly is quiet he’ll see fit to approach.” | T: Maybe, if he perceives our group as quiet, he will consider it worth his while to come our way.”
mn77:4.11 | S: Then those wanderers fell silent. | T: So the wanderers fell silent.
mn77:5.1 | S: Then the Buddha approached Sakuludāyī, | T: Then the Blessed One approached Sakuludāyin the wanderer,
mn77:5.2 | S: who said to him, | T: who said to him,
mn77:5.3 | S: “Let the Blessed One come, sir! | T: “Come, lord Blessed One.
mn77:5.4 | S: Welcome to the Blessed One, sir! | T: You are well-come, lord Blessed One.
mn77:5.5 | S: It’s been a long time since you took the opportunity to come here. | T: It has been long, lord Blessed One, since you arranged to come here.
mn77:5.6 | S: Please, sir, sit down, this seat is ready.” | T: Have a seat, lord Blessed One.
mn77:5.8 | S: The Buddha sat down on the seat spread out, | T: This seat is laid out.” The Blessed One sat down on the seat laid out,
mn77:5.9 | S: while Sakuludāyī took a low seat and sat to one side. | T: while Sakuludāyin the wanderer, taking a lower seat, sat to one side.
mn77:5.10 | S: The Buddha said to him, | T: As he was sitting there, the Blessed One said to him,
mn77:5.11 | S: “Udāyī, what were you sitting talking about just now? What conversation was left unfinished?” | T: “For what topic of conversation are you sitting gathered together here, Udāyin? What is the topic of your conversation that has been interrupted midway?”
mn77:6.1 | S: “Sir, leave aside what we were sitting talking about just now. | T: When this was said, Sakuludāyin the wanderer replied, “Never mind, lord, about the topic of conversation for which we are sitting gathered here.
mn77:6.2 | S: It won’t be hard for you to hear about that later. | T: It won’t be difficult for the Blessed One to hear about that later.
mn77:6.3 | S: Sir, a few days ago several ascetics and brahmins who follow various other religions were sitting together at the debating hall, and this discussion came up among them: | T: For the past few days a discussion has arisen among the many sects of contemplatives & brahmans gathered and sitting together in the debating hall;
mn77:6.4 | S: ‘The people of Aṅga and Magadha are so fortunate, so very fortunate! | T: ‘What a gain for the people of Aṅga & Māgadha! What a great gain for the people of Aṅga & Māgadha,
mn77:6.5 | S: For there are these ascetics and brahmins who lead an order and a community, and tutor a community. They’re well-known and famous religious founders, deemed holy by many people. And they have come down for the rainy season residence at Rājagaha. | T: that these contemplatives & brahmans—the leaders of communities, the leaders of groups, well-known & prestigious founders of sects, highly regarded by people at large—have come to spend the Rains near Rājagaha!
mn77:6.6 | S: They include Pūraṇa Kassapa, | T: “‘There’s this Pūraṇa Kassapa who is the leader of a community, the leader of a group, the teacher of a group, a well-known & prestigious founder of a sect, highly regarded by people at large. He has come to spend the Rains near Rājagaha.
mn77:6.8 | S: the bamboo-staffed ascetic Gosāla, | T: There’s this Makkhali Gosāla…
mn77:6.9 | S: Ajita of the hair blanket, | T: this Ajita Kesakambalin…
mn77:6.10 | S: Pakudha Kaccāyana, | T: this Pakudha Kaccāyana…
mn77:6.11 | S: Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta, | T: this Sañjaya Velaṭṭhaputta…
mn77:6.12 | S: and the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan. | T: this Nigaṇṭha Nāṭaputta who is the leader of a community, the leader of a group, the teacher of a group, a well-known & prestigious founder of a sect, highly regarded by people at large. He, too, has come to spend the Rains near Rājagaha.
mn77:6.14 | S: This ascetic Gotama also leads an order and a community, and tutors a community. He’s a well-known and famous religious founder, deemed holy by many people. | T: “‘And then there’s this Gotama the contemplative who is the leader of a community, the leader of a group, the teacher of a group, a well-known & prestigious founder of a sect, highly regarded by people at large.
mn77:6.15 | S: And he too has come down for the rains residence at Rājagaha. | T: He, too, has come to spend the Rains near Rājagaha.
mn77:6.16 | S: Which of these ascetics and brahmins is honored, respected, revered, and venerated by their disciples? And how do their disciples, honoring and respecting them, remain loyal?’ | T: “‘Now, among these venerable contemplatives & brahmans, who is honored, respected, revered, & worshiped by his disciples? And how, honoring & respecting him, do his disciples remain in dependence on him?’
mn77:6.17 | S: Some of them said: | T: “Then some said this,
mn77:6.18 | S: ‘This Pūraṇa Kassapa leads an order and a community, and tutors a community. He’s a well-known and famous religious founder, deemed holy by many people. | T: ‘This Pūraṇa Kassapa—the leader of a community, the leader of a group, the teacher of a group, a well-known & prestigious founder of a sect, highly regarded by people at large—
mn77:6.19 | S: But he’s not honored, respected, revered, and venerated by his disciples. And his disciples, not honoring and respecting him, don’t remain loyal to him. | T: is not honored, respected, revered, or worshiped by his disciples. And they don’t, honoring & respecting him, remain in dependence on him.
mn77:6.20 | S: Once it so happened that he was teaching an assembly of many hundreds. | T: Once, when Pūraṇa Kassapa was teaching his doctrine to a following of more than one hundred,
mn77:6.21 | S: Then one of his disciples made a noise, | T: one of his disciples called out,
mn77:6.22 | S: “My good fellows, don’t ask Pūraṇa Kassapa about that. | T: “Sirs, don’t ask Pūraṇa Kassapa about that matter.
mn77:6.23 | S: He doesn’t know that. | T: He doesn’t know it.
mn77:6.24 | S: I know it. Ask me about it, | T: We know it. Ask us about that matter.
mn77:6.25 | S: and I’ll answer you.” | T: We, sirs, will explain it for you.”
mn77:6.26 | S: Once it so happened that Pūraṇa Kassapa didn’t get his way, though he called out with raised arms, | T: Pūraṇa Kassapa didn’t get his way, even though he waved his arms & cried,
mn77:6.27 | S: “Be quiet, good fellows, don’t make a sound. | T: “Be quiet, sirs. Don’t make a sound, sirs.
mn77:6.28 | S: They’re not asking you, they’re asking me! | T: They’re not asking you about that. They’re asking us about that.
mn77:6.29 | S: I’ll answer you!” | T: I will explain about that.”
mn77:6.30 | S: Indeed, many of his disciples have left him after refuting his doctrine: | T: And many of his disciples left him after refuting his doctrine:
mn77:6.31 | S: “You don’t understand this teaching and training. I understand this teaching and training. What, you understand this teaching and training? You’re practicing wrong. I’m practicing right. I stay on topic, you don’t. You said last what you should have said first. You said first what you should have said last. What you’ve thought so much about has been disproved. Your doctrine is refuted. Go on, save your doctrine! You’re trapped; get yourself out of this—if you can!” | T: “You don’t understand this doctrine & discipline. I understand this doctrine & discipline. How could you understand this doctrine & discipline? You practice wrongly. I practice rightly. I’m consistent. You’re inconsistent. What should be said first, you said last. What should be said last, you said first. What you cogitated so long has been turned inside out. Your position has been overthrown. You’re trapped, so go try to release your position or disentangle yourself if you can!”
mn77:6.32 | S: That’s how Pūraṇa Kassapa is not honored, respected, revered, venerated, and esteemed by his disciples. On the contrary, his disciples, not honoring and respecting him, don’t remain loyal to him. | T: “‘Thus this Pūraṇa Kassapa—the leader of a community, the leader of a group, the teacher of a group, a well-known & prestigious founder of a sect, highly regarded by people at large—is not honored, respected, revered, or worshiped by his disciples. They don’t, honoring & respecting him, remain in dependence on him.
mn77:6.33 | S: Rather, he’s reviled, and rightly so.’ | T: And he is scorned with rightful scorn.’
mn77:6.34 | S: Others said: | T: (none)
mn77:6.35 | S: ‘This bamboo-staffed ascetic Gosāla … | T: [Similarly with Makkhali Gosāla,
mn77:6.36 | S: Ajita of the hair blanket … | T: Ajita Kesakambalin,
mn77:6.37 | S: Pakudha Kaccāyana … | T: Pakudha Kaccāyana,
mn77:6.38 | S: Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta … | T: Sañjaya Velaṭṭhaputta,
mn77:6.39 | S: This Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan leads an order and a community, and tutors a community. He’s a well-known and famous religious founder, deemed holy by many people. | T: (none)
mn77:6.40 | S: But he’s not honored, respected, revered, and venerated by his disciples. And his disciples, not honoring and respecting him, don’t remain loyal to him. | T: (none)
mn77:6.41 | S: Once it so happened that he was teaching an assembly of many hundreds. | T: (none)
mn77:6.42 | S: Then one of his disciples made a noise, | T: (none)
mn77:6.43 | S: “My good fellows, don’t ask the Jain Ñātika about that. | T: (none)
mn77:6.44 | S: He doesn’t know that. | T: (none)
mn77:6.45 | S: I know it. Ask me about it, | T: (none)
mn77:6.46 | S: and I’ll answer you.” | T: (none)
mn77:6.47 | S: Once it so happened that the Jain Ñātika didn’t get his way, though he called out with raised arms, | T: (none)
mn77:6.48 | S: “Be quiet, good fellows, don’t make a sound. | T: (none)
mn77:6.49 | S: They’re not asking you, they’re asking me! | T: (none)
mn77:6.50 | S: I’ll answer you!” | T: (none)
mn77:6.51 | S: Indeed, many of his disciples have left him after refuting his doctrine: | T: (none)
mn77:6.52 | S: “You don’t understand this teaching and training. I understand this teaching and training. What, you understand this teaching and training? You’re practicing wrong. I’m practicing right. I stay on topic, you don’t. You said last what you should have said first. You said first what you should have said last. What you’ve thought so much about has been disproved. Your doctrine is refuted. Go on, save your doctrine! You’re trapped; get yourself out of this—if you can!” | T: (none)
mn77:6.53 | S: That’s how the Jain Ñātika is not honored, respected, revered, and venerated by his disciples. On the contrary, his disciples, not honoring and respecting him, don’t remain loyal to him. | T: (none)
mn77:6.54 | S: Rather, he’s reviled, and rightly so.’ | T: & Nigaṇṭha Nāṭaputta.]
mn77:6.55 | S: Others said: | T: “Then some said this,
mn77:6.56 | S: ‘This ascetic Gotama leads an order and a community, and tutors a community. He’s a well-known and famous religious founder, deemed holy by many people. | T: (none)
mn77:6.57 | S: He’s honored, respected, revered, and venerated by his disciples. And his disciples, honoring and respecting him, remain loyal to him. | T: ‘This Gotama the contemplative is honored, respected, revered, & worshiped by his disciples. And his disciples, honoring & respecting him, remain in dependence on him.
mn77:6.58 | S: Once it so happened that he was teaching an assembly of many hundreds. | T: Once, Gotama the contemplative was teaching the Dhamma to an assembly of many hundreds.
mn77:6.59 | S: Then one of his disciples cleared their throat. | T: There one of his disciples cleared his throat,
mn77:6.60 | S: And one of their spiritual companions nudged them with their knee, to indicate, | T: upon which one of his fellows in the holy life nudged him with his knee:
mn77:6.61 | S: “Hush, venerable, don’t make sound! Our teacher, the Blessed One, is teaching!” | T: “Be quiet, venerable sir. Don’t make a sound. Our Teacher, the Blessed One, is teaching the Dhamma.”
mn77:6.62 | S: While the ascetic Gotama is teaching an assembly of many hundreds, there is no sound of his disciples coughing or clearing their throats. | T: On any occasion when Gotama the contemplative is teaching the Dhamma to an assembly of many hundreds, there is no sound of coughing or throat-clearing among his disciples.
mn77:6.63 | S: That large crowd is poised expectantly at the ready, thinking, | T: Instead, that great crowd of people is standing by in expectancy:
mn77:6.64 | S: “Whatever the Buddha teaches, we shall listen to it.” | T: “We will hear the Dhamma the Blessed One will teach.”
mn77:6.65 | S: It’s like when there’s a person at the crossroads pressing out pure dwarf-bee honey, | T: Just as if a man at a crossroads were to press out pure honey,
mn77:6.66 | S: and a large crowd is poised expectantly at the ready. | T: and a great crowd of people would be standing by in expectancy,
mn77:6.67 | S: In the same way, while the ascetic Gotama is teaching an assembly of many hundreds, there is no sound of his disciples coughing or clearing their throats. | T: in the same way, on any occasion when Gotama the contemplative is teaching the Dhamma to an assembly of many hundreds, there is no sound of coughing or throat-clearing among his disciples.
mn77:6.68 | S: That large crowd is poised expectantly at the ready, thinking, | T: Instead, that great crowd of people is standing by in expectancy:
mn77:6.69 | S: “Whatever the Buddha teaches, we shall listen to it.” | T: “We will hear the Dhamma the Blessed One will teach.”
mn77:6.70 | S: Even when disciples of the ascetic Gotama, having clashed with their spiritual companions, resign the training and return to a lesser life, they speak only praise of the Teacher, the teaching, and the Saṅgha. They blame only themselves, not others: “We were unlucky, we had little merit. For even after going forth in such a well explained teaching and training we weren’t able to practice for life the perfectly full and pure spiritual life.” | T: “‘And those of Gotama the contemplative’s disciples who, having fallen out with their fellows in the holy life, disavow the training and return to the lower life, even they speak in praise of their Teacher, in praise of the Dhamma, in praise of the Saṅgha. They blame themselves, and not others, (saying,) “We were unfortunate and without merit, in that even though we went forth into such a well-taught Dhamma & Vinaya, we were unable to follow the holy life, complete and perfect, throughout life.”
mn77:6.71 | S: They become monastery workers or lay followers, and they proceed having undertaken the five precepts. | T: Becoming monastery attendants or lay followers, they undertake and observe the five training rules.
mn77:6.72 | S: That’s how the ascetic Gotama is honored, respected, revered, and venerated by his disciples. And that’s how his disciples, honoring and respecting him, remain loyal to him.’” | T: In this way, Gotama the contemplative is honored, respected, revered, & worshiped by his disciples. And his disciples, honoring & respecting him, remain in dependence on him.’”
mn77:7.1 | S: “But Udāyī, how many qualities do you see in me, because of which my disciples honor, respect, revere, and venerate me; and honoring and respecting me, they remain loyal to me?” | T: “But, Udāyin, how many qualities do you see in me for which my disciples honor, respect, revere, & worship me and—honoring & respecting me—remain in dependence on me?” “Lord, I see five qualities in the Blessed One for which his disciples honor, respect, revere, & worship him and—honoring & respecting him—remain in dependence on him.
mn77:8.1 | S: “Sir, I see five such qualities in the Buddha. | T: Which five? The Blessed One, lord,
mn77:8.2 | S: What five? | T: (none)
mn77:8.3 | S: The Buddha eats little and praises eating little. | T: eats little and speaks in praise of eating little. The fact that the Blessed One eats little and speaks in praise of eating little:
mn77:8.4 | S: This is the first such quality I see in the Buddha. | T: This is the first quality I see in the Blessed One for which his disciples honor, respect, revere, & worship him and—honoring & respecting him—remain in dependence on him.
mn77:8.5 | S: Furthermore, the Buddha is content with any kind of robe, and praises such contentment. | T: “Further, the Blessed One is content with any old robe cloth at all and speaks in praise of being content with any old robe cloth at all…
mn77:8.6 | S: This is the second such quality I see in the Buddha. | T: (none)
mn77:8.7 | S: Furthermore, the Buddha is content with any kind of almsfood, and praises such contentment. | T: “Further, the Blessed One is content with any old almsfood at all and speaks in praise of being content with any old almsfood at all…
mn77:8.8 | S: This is the third such quality I see in the Buddha. | T: (none)
mn77:8.9 | S: Furthermore, the Buddha is content with any kind of lodging, and praises such contentment. | T: “Further, the Blessed One is content with any old lodging at all and speaks in praise of being content with any old lodging at all…
mn77:8.10 | S: This is the fourth such quality I see in the Buddha. | T: (none)
mn77:8.11 | S: Furthermore, the Buddha is secluded, and praises seclusion. | T: “Further, the Blessed One is secluded and speaks in praise of being secluded. The fact that the Blessed One is secluded and speaks in praise of being secluded:
mn77:8.12 | S: This is the fifth such quality I see in the Buddha. | T: This is the fifth quality I see in the Blessed One for which his disciples honor,
mn77:8.13 | S: These are the five qualities I see in the Buddha, because of which his disciples honor, respect, revere, and venerate him; and honoring and respecting him, they remain loyal to him.” | T: respect, revere, & worship him and—honoring & respecting him—remain in dependence on him. These are the five qualities I see in the Blessed One for which his disciples honor, respect, revere, & worship him and—honoring & respecting him—remain in dependence on him.”
mn77:9.1 | S: “Suppose, Udāyī, my disciples were loyal to me because I eat little. Well, there are disciples of mine who eat a tumbler of food, or half a tumbler; they eat a wood-apple, or half a wood-apple. | T: “But, Udāyin, if my disciples honored, respected, revered, & worshiped me, and—honoring & respecting me—remained in dependence on me, (thinking,) ‘The Blessed One eats little and speaks in praise of eating little’: There are disciples of mine who eat a cupful or half a cupful of food, a bamboo-fruit or half a bamboo-fruit (amount) of food (a day). Yet I sometimes eat as much as this bowlful of food or more.
mn77:9.2 | S: But sometimes I even eat this bowl full to the brim, or even more. | T: (none)
mn77:9.3 | S: So if it were the case that my disciples are loyal to me because I eat little, then those disciples who eat even less would not be loyal to me. | T: So if my disciples honored… me, (thinking,) ‘The Blessed One eats little and speaks in praise of eating little,’ then those disciples of mine who eat a cupful or half a cupful of food, a bamboo-fruit or half a bamboo-fruit (amount) of food (a day) wouldn’t honor, respect, revere, or worship me or—honoring & respecting me—remain in dependence on me.
mn77:9.4 | S: Suppose my disciples were loyal to me because I’m content with any kind of robe. Well, there are disciples of mine who have rag robes, wearing shabby robes. They gather scraps from charnel grounds, rubbish dumps, and shops, make them into a patchwork robe and wear it. | T: “If my disciples honored… me, (thinking,) ‘The Blessed One is content with any old robe cloth at all and speaks in praise of being content with any old robe cloth at all’: There are disciples of mine who wear rag-robes & coarse robes. They—gathering cloth scraps from a charnel ground, a rubbish heap, or a shop, and making them into patched-together robes—wear them.
mn77:9.5 | S: But sometimes I wear robes offered by householders that are strong, yet next to which bottle-gourd down is coarse. | T: Yet I sometimes wear robes given by householders, so fine that the hair of a bottle gourd plant is coarse in comparison.
mn77:9.6 | S: So if it were the case that my disciples are loyal to me because I’m content with any kind of robe, then those disciples who wear rag robes would not be loyal to me. | T: So if my disciples honored… me, (thinking,) ‘The Blessed One is content with any old robe cloth at all and speaks in praise of being content with any old robe cloth at all,’ then those disciples of mine who wear rag-robes & coarse robes wouldn’t honor, respect, revere, or worship me or—honoring & respecting me—remain in dependence on me.
mn77:9.7 | S: Suppose my disciples were loyal to me because I’m content with any kind of almsfood. Well, there are disciples of mine who eat only almsfood, wander indiscriminately for almsfood, happy to eat whatever they glean. When they’ve entered an inhabited area, they don’t consent when invited to sit down. | T: “If my disciples honored… me, (thinking,) ‘The Blessed One is content with any old almsfood at all and speaks in praise of being content with any old almsfood at all’: There are disciples of mine who are almsgoers, who go on unbroken almsround [not skipping over households], who delight in the practice of taking what is to be thrown away. When going among houses, they will not consent even to sitting down when invited.
mn77:9.8 | S: But sometimes I even eat by invitation boiled fine rice with the dark grains picked out, served with many soups and sauces. | T: Yet I sometimes eat invitational meals of select rice & wheat with many curries & sauces.
mn77:9.9 | S: So if it were the case that my disciples are loyal to me because I’m content with any kind of almsfood, then those disciples who eat only almsfood would not be loyal to me. | T: So if my disciples honored… me, (thinking,) ‘The Blessed One is content with any old almsfood at all and speaks in praise of being content with any old almsfood at all,’ then those disciples of mine who are almsgoers, who go on unbroken almsround, who delight in the practice of taking what is to be thrown away, who—when going among houses, they will not consent even to sitting down when invited—wouldn’t honor, respect, revere, or worship me or—honoring & respecting me—remain in dependence on me.
mn77:9.10 | S: Suppose my disciples were loyal to me because I’m content with any kind of lodging. Well, there are disciples of mine who stay at the root of a tree, in the open air. For eight months they don’t go under a roof. | T: “If my disciples honored… me, (thinking,) ‘The Blessed One is content with any old lodging at all and speaks in praise of being content with any old lodging at all’: There are disciples of mine who live at the roots of trees or in the open air. For eight months (of the dry season) they don’t rest under a roof.
mn77:9.11 | S: But sometimes I even stay in bungalows, plastered inside and out, draft-free, with doors fastened and windows shuttered. | T: Yet I sometimes live in dwellings with a gabled roof, plastered inside & out, draft-free, with close-fitting door & windows shut against the wind.
mn77:9.12 | S: So if it were the case that my disciples are loyal to me because I’m content with any kind of lodging, then those disciples who stay at the root of a tree would not be loyal to me. | T: So if my disciples honored… me, (thinking,) ‘The Blessed One is content with any old lodging at all and speaks in praise of being content with any old lodging at all,’ then those disciples of mine who live at the roots of trees or in the open air, who—for eight months don’t rest under a roof—wouldn’t honor, respect, revere, or worship me or—honoring & respecting me—remain in dependence on me.
mn77:9.13 | S: Suppose my disciples were loyal to me because I’m secluded and I praise seclusion. Well, there are disciples of mine who live in the wilderness, in remote lodgings. Having ventured deep into remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest, they live there, coming down to the midst of the Saṅgha each fortnight for the recitation of the monastic code. | T: “If my disciples honored, respected, revered, & worshiped me, and—honoring & respecting me—remained in dependence on me, (thinking,) ‘The Blessed One is secluded and speaks in praise of being secluded’: There are disciples of mine who are wilderness dwellers, who live, having plunged into remote dwelling spots, in wild forest thickets. Only once every half-month do they enter into the midst of the Saṅgha for the Pāṭimokkha recitation.
mn77:9.14 | S: But sometimes I live crowded by monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen; by rulers and their chief ministers, and monastics of other religions and their disciples. | T: Yet I sometimes live surrounded by monks & nuns, male lay followers & female lay followers, kings & kings ministers, sectarians & sectarians’ disciples.
mn77:9.15 | S: So if it were the case that my disciples are loyal to me because I’m secluded and praise seclusion, then those disciples who live in the wilderness would not be loyal to me. | T: So if my disciples honored, respected, revered, & worshiped me, and—honoring & respecting me—remained in dependence on me, (thinking,) ‘The Blessed One is secluded and speaks in praise of being secluded,’ then those disciples of mine who are wilderness dwellers, who live, having plunged into remote dwelling spots, in wild forest thickets, and who only once every half-month enter into the midst of the Saṅgha for the Pāṭimokkha recitation,
mn77:9.16 | S: So, Udāyī, it’s not because of these five qualities that my disciples honor, respect, revere, and venerate me; and honoring and respecting me, they remain loyal to me. | T: wouldn’t honor, respect, revere, or worship me or—honoring & respecting me—remain in dependence on me. “There are, Udāyin,
mn77:10.1 | S: There are five other qualities because of which my disciples honor, respect, revere, and venerate me; and honoring and respecting me, they remain loyal to me. | T: five other qualities for which my disciples honor, respect, revere, & worship me and—honoring & respecting me—remain in dependence on me.
mn77:10.2 | S: What five? | T: Which five?
mn77:10.3 | S: Firstly, my disciples esteem me for the higher ethics: | T: “There is the case where my disciples esteem me for my heightened virtue, (thinking,)
mn77:10.4 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama is ethical. He possesses the entire spectrum of ethical conduct to the highest degree.’ | T: ‘Gotama the contemplative is virtuous, endowed with the foremost aggregate of virtue.’
mn77:11.1 | S: Since this is so, | T: (none)
mn77:11.2 | S: this is the first quality because of which my disciples are loyal to me. | T: This is the first quality for which my disciples honor, respect, revere, & worship me and—honoring & respecting me—remain in dependence on me.
mn77:12.1 | S: Furthermore, my disciples esteem me for my excellent knowledge and vision: | T: “Further, there is the case where my disciples esteem me for my exceeding knowledge & vision, (thinking,)
mn77:12.2 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama only claims to know when he does in fact know. | T: ‘Only when knowing does Gotama the contemplative say, “I know.”
mn77:12.3 | S: He only claims to see when he really does see. | T: Only when seeing does he say, “I see.”
mn77:12.4 | S: He teaches based on direct knowledge, not without direct knowledge. | T: It’s through direct knowledge that he teaches the Dhamma, not without direct knowledge.
mn77:12.5 | S: He teaches based on reason, not without reason. | T: It’s with a cause that he teaches the Dhamma, not without a cause.
mn77:12.6 | S: He teaches with a demonstrable basis, not without it.’ | T: It’s with marvels that he teaches the Dhamma, not without marvels.’
mn77:12.7 | S: Since this is so, | T: (none)
mn77:12.12 | S: this is the second quality because of which my disciples are loyal to me. | T: This is the second quality…
mn77:13.1 | S: Furthermore, my disciples esteem me for my higher wisdom: | T: “Further, there is the case where my disciples esteem me for my heightened discernment, (thinking,)
mn77:13.2 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama is wise. He possesses the entire spectrum of wisdom to the highest degree. | T: ‘Gotama the contemplative is discerning, endowed with the foremost aggregate of discernment.’
mn77:13.3 | S: It’s not possible that he would fail to foresee grounds for future criticism, or to legitimately and completely refute the doctrines of others that come up.’ | T: It’s impossible that he wouldn’t foresee the future consequences of a doctrine, or that he wouldn’t refute an existing opposing doctrine, having well-refuted it in line with the Dhamma.’
mn77:13.4 | S: What do you think, Udāyī? | T: What do you think, Udāyin?
mn77:13.5 | S: Would my disciples, knowing and seeing this, break in and interrupt me?” | T: Would my disciples—thus knowing, thus seeing—interrupt me in mid-sentence?”
mn77:13.6 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “No, lord.”
mn77:13.7 | S: “That’s because I don’t expect to be instructed by my disciples. | T: (none)
mn77:13.8 | S: Invariably, my disciples expect instruction from me. | T: “It’s not the case that I expect instruction from my disciples. Invariably, they expect instruction from me.”
mn77:13.9 | S: Since this is so, | T: (none)
mn77:13.13 | S: this is the third quality because of which my disciples are loyal to me. | T: This is the third quality…
mn77:14.1 | S: Furthermore, my disciples come to me and ask how the noble truth of suffering applies to the suffering in which they are swamped and mired. And I provide them with a satisfying answer to their question. | T: “Further, when my disciples have met with suffering & stress, are beset with suffering & stress and overcome with suffering & stress, they—having approached me—ask about the noble truth of suffering. I, being asked, explain the noble truth of suffering and I satisfy their minds with my answer.
mn77:14.2 | S: They ask how the noble truths of the origin of suffering, | T: They ask me about the noble truth of the origination of suffering … the noble truth of the cessation of suffering …
mn77:14.3 | S: the cessation of suffering, | T: (none)
mn77:14.4 | S: and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering apply to the suffering  in which they are swamped and mired. And I provide them with satisfying answers to their questions. | T: the noble truth of the path of practice leading to the cessation of suffering. I, being asked, explain the noble truth of the path of practice leading to the cessation of suffering and I satisfy their minds with my answer.
mn77:14.5 | S: Since this is so, | T: (none)
mn77:14.11 | S: this is the fourth quality because of which my disciples are loyal to me. | T: This is the fourth quality…
mn77:15.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. | T: The Four Establishings of Mindfulness “Further, I have pointed out to my disciples the path of practice, practicing in line with which they develop the four establishings of mindfulness:
mn77:15.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. | T: There is the case where a monk remains focused on the body in & of itself—ardent, alert, & mindful—subduing greed & distress with reference to the world.
mn77:15.3 | S: They meditate observing an aspect of feelings … | T: He remains focused on feelings in & of themselves… the mind in & of itself…
mn77:15.4 | S: mind … | T: (none)
mn77:15.5 | S: principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. | T: mental qualities in & of themselves—ardent, alert, & mindful—subduing greed & distress with reference to the world.
mn77:15.6 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And there many of my disciples remain, having attained the perfection & culmination of direct knowledge.
mn77:16.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the four right efforts. | T: The Four Right Exertions “Further, I have pointed out to my disciples the path of practice, practicing in line with which they develop the four right exertions:
mn77:16.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities don’t arise. | T: There is the case where a monk generates desire, endeavors, activates persistence, upholds & exerts his intent for the sake of the non-arising of evil,
mn77:16.3 | S: They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up. | T: unskillful qualities that have not yet arisen… for the sake of the abandoning of evil, unskillful qualities that have arisen…
mn77:16.4 | S: They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities arise. | T: (none)
mn77:16.5 | S: They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are fully developed. | T: for the sake of the arising of skillful qualities that have not yet arisen. He generates desire, endeavors, activates persistence, upholds & exerts his intent for the maintenance, non-confusion, increase, plenitude, development, & culmination of skillful qualities that have arisen.
mn77:16.6 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And there many of my disciples remain, having attained the perfection & culmination of direct knowledge.
mn77:17.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the four bases of psychic power. | T: The Four Bases of Power “Further, I have pointed out to my disciples the path of practice, practicing in line with which they develop the four bases of power:
mn77:17.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort. | T: There is the case where a monk develops the base of power endowed with concentration founded on desire & the fabrications of exertion.
mn77:17.3 | S: They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy, and active effort. | T: He develops the base of power endowed with concentration founded on persistence…
mn77:17.4 | S: They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to mental development, and active effort. | T: the base of power endowed with concentration founded on intent…
mn77:17.5 | S: They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to inquiry, and active effort. | T: the base of power endowed with concentration founded on discrimination & the fabrications of exertion.
mn77:17.6 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And there many of my disciples remain, having attained the perfection & culmination of direct knowledge.
mn77:18.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the five faculties. | T: The Five Faculties “Further, I have pointed out to my disciples the path of practice, practicing in line with which they develop the five faculties: There is the case where a monk develops the faculty of conviction going to stilling, going to self-awakening.
mn77:18.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant develops the faculties of faith, | T: He develops the faculty of persistence…
