## ud5.6
ud5.6:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: (none)
ud5.6:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. | T: I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Sāvatthī at Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.
ud5.6:1.3 | S: Now at that time Venerable Mahākaccāna was staying in the land of the Avantis near Kuraraghara on Steep Mountain. | T: And on that occasion Ven. Mahā Kaccāna was living among the people of Avantī on Pavatta Mountain near the Osprey Habitat.
ud5.6:1.4 | S: And the layman Soṇa of the Sharp Ears was Mahākaccāna’s attendant. | T: And at that time the lay follower Soṇa Koṭikaṇṇa was Ven. Mahā Kaccāna’s supporter.
ud5.6:2.1 | S: Then as Soṇa was in private retreat this thought came to his mind, | T: Then as Soṇa Koṭikaṇṇa was alone in seclusion, this train of thought appeared to his awareness:
ud5.6:2.2 | S: “As I understand Master Mahākaccāna’s teachings, it’s not easy for someone living at home to lead the spiritual life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell. | T: “According to the Dhamma that Master Mahā Kaccāna teaches, it’s not easy living at home to practice the holy life totally perfect, totally pure, like a polished shell. What if I were to shave off my hair & beard, put on the ochre robes, and go forth from the household life into homelessness?” So he went to Ven. Mahā Kaccāna and on arrival, having bowed down to Ven. Mahā Kaccāna, sat to one side. As he was sitting there he said to Ven. Mahā Kaccāna, “Just now, venerable sir, as I was alone in seclusion, this train of thought appeared to my awareness: ‘According to the Dhamma that Master Mahā Kaccāna teaches, it’s not easy living at home to practice the holy life totally perfect, totally pure, like a polished shell. What if I were to shave off my hair & beard, put on the ochre robes, and go forth from the household life into homelessness?’ Give me the going-forth, Master Mahā Kaccāna!” When this was said, Ven. Mahā Kaccāna said to Soṇa Koṭikaṇṇa, “It’s hard, Soṇa, the life-long, one-meal-a-day, sleeping-alone holy life. Please, right there as you are a householder, devote yourself to the message of the Awakened Ones and to the proper-time [i.e., uposatha day], one-meal-a-day, sleeping-alone holy life.” And so Soṇa Koṭikaṇṇa’s idea of going-forth subsided. Then a second time as Soṇa Koṭikaṇṇa was alone in seclusion, this train of thought appeared to his awareness: “According to the Dhamma that Master Mahā Kaccāna teaches, it’s not easy living at home to practice the holy life totally perfect, totally pure, like a polished shell.
ud5.6:2.3 | S: Why don’t I shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from lay life to homelessness?” | T: What if I were to shave off my hair & beard, put on the ochre robes, and go forth from the household life into homelessness?”
ud5.6:3.1 | S: Then Soṇa went up to Mahākaccāna, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what he was thinking. Then he said, | T: So he went to Ven. Mahā Kaccāna and on arrival, having bowed down to Ven. Mahā Kaccāna, sat to one side. As he was sitting there he said to Ven. Mahā Kaccāna,
ud5.6:4.1 | P: “Idha mayhaṁ, bhante, rahogatassa paṭisallīnassa evaṁ cetaso parivitakko udapādi: | T: “Just now, venerable sir, as I was alone in seclusion, this train of thought appeared to my awareness:
ud5.6:4.2 | P: ‘yathā yathā kho ayyo mahākaccāno dhammaṁ deseti nayidaṁ sukaraṁ agāraṁ ajjhāvasatā ekantaparipuṇṇaṁ ekantaparisuddhaṁ saṅkhalikhitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ carituṁ. | T: ‘According to the Dhamma that Master Mahā Kaccāna teaches, it’s not easy living at home to practice the holy life totally perfect, totally pure, like a polished shell.
ud5.6:4.3 | P: Yannūnāhaṁ kesamassuṁ ohāretvā kāsāyāni vatthāni acchādetvā agārasmā anagāriyaṁ pabbajeyyan’ti. | T: What if I were to shave off my hair & beard, put on the ochre robes,
ud5.6:4.4 | S: “May Master Mahākaccāna please give me the going forth!” | T: and go forth from the household life into homelessness?’ Give me the going-forth, Master Mahā Kaccāna!”
ud5.6:5.1 | S: When this was said, Mahākaccāna said to him, | T: When this was said, Ven. Mahā Kaccāna said to Soṇa Koṭikaṇṇa,
ud5.6:5.2 | S: “It’s hard to lead the spiritual life as long as you live, eating in one part of the day and sleeping alone. | T: “It’s hard, Soṇa, the life-long, one-meal-a-day, sleeping-alone holy life.
ud5.6:5.3 | S: Come now, Soṇa, while remaining a layperson just as you are, devote yourself to the instructions of the Buddhas, leading the spiritual life at suitable times, eating in one part of the day and sleeping alone.” | T: Please, right there as you are a householder, devote yourself to the message of the Awakened Ones and to the proper-time, one-meal-a-day, sleeping-alone holy life.”
ud5.6:5.4 | S: Then Soṇa’s aspiration to go forth died down. | T: And so Soṇa Koṭikaṇṇa’s idea of going-forth subsided a second time.
ud5.6:6.1 | S: For a second time, while in private retreat the thought came to Soṇa that he should go forth, but the outcome was the same. | T: (none)
ud5.6:7.1 | S: For a third time, as Soṇa was in private retreat this thought came to his mind, | T: Then a third time as Soṇa Koṭikaṇṇa was alone in seclusion, this train of thought appeared to his awareness:
ud5.6:7.2 | S: “As I understand Master Mahākaccāna’s teachings, it’s not easy for someone living at home to lead the spiritual life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell. | T: “According to the Dhamma that Master Mahā Kaccāna teaches, it’s not easy living at home to practice the holy life totally perfect, totally pure, like a polished shell.
ud5.6:7.3 | S: Why don’t I shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from lay life to homelessness?” | T: What if I were to shave off my hair & beard, put on the ochre robes, and go forth from the household life into homelessness?”
ud5.6:7.4 | S: For a third time, Soṇa went up to Mahākaccāna, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what he was thinking. Then he said, | T: So he went to Ven. Mahā Kaccāna and on arrival, having bowed down to Ven. Mahā Kaccāna, sat to one side. As he was sitting there he said to Ven. Mahā Kaccāna,
ud5.6:8.1 | P: “Idha mayhaṁ, bhante, rahogatassa paṭisallīnassa evaṁ cetaso parivitakko udapādi: | T: “Just now, venerable sir, as I was alone in seclusion, this train of thought appeared to my awareness:
ud5.6:8.2 | P: ‘yathā yathā kho ayyo mahākaccāno dhammaṁ deseti nayidaṁ sukaraṁ agāraṁ ajjhāvasatā ekantaparipuṇṇaṁ ekantaparisuddhaṁ saṅkhalikhitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ carituṁ. | T: ‘According to the Dhamma that Master Mahā Kaccāna teaches, it’s not easy living at home to practice the holy life totally perfect, totally pure, like a polished shell.
ud5.6:8.3 | P: Yannūnāhaṁ kesamassuṁ ohāretvā kāsāyāni vatthāni acchādetvā agārasmā anagāriyaṁ pabbajeyyan’ti. | T: What if I were to shave off my hair & beard, put on the ochre robes,
ud5.6:8.4 | S: “May Master Mahākaccāna please give me the going forth!” | T: and go forth from the household life into homelessness?’ Give me the going-forth, Master Mahā Kaccāna!”
ud5.6:9.1 | S: Then Mahākaccāna gave Soṇa the going forth. | T: So Ven. Mahā Kaccāna gave Soṇa Koṭikaṇṇa the going-forth.
ud5.6:9.2 | S: Now at that time the southern region, including Avanti, was short of monks. | T: Now at that time the southern country of Avantī was short of monks.
ud5.6:9.3 | S: It took three years and much struggle and difficulty before Venerable Mahākaccāna was able to assemble from here and there a Saṅgha consisting of ten monks and give Venerable Soṇa the full ordination. | T: So only after three years–having gathered from here & there with hardship & difficulty a quorum-of-ten community of monks–did Ven. Mahā Kaccāna give full admission to Ven. Soṇa.
ud5.6:10.1 | S: Then as Venerable Soṇa was in private retreat this thought came to his mind, | T: Then, after having completed the Rains retreat, as he was alone in seclusion, this train of thought appeared to Ven. Soṇa’s awareness:
ud5.6:10.2 | S: “I have not personally seen the Buddha. I have only heard reports that | T: “I haven’t seen the Blessed One face-to-face.
ud5.6:10.3 | S: that Blessed One is like this or like that. | T: I’ve simply heard that he is like this and like this.
ud5.6:10.4 | S: If my mentor allows, I should go to see that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha.” | T: If my preceptor would give me permission, I would go to see the Blessed One, worthy & rightly self-awakened.”
ud5.6:11.1 | S: Then in the late afternoon, Soṇa came out of retreat, went up to Mahākaccāna, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what he was thinking. Then Mahākaccāna said, | T: So, leaving seclusion in the late afternoon, he went to Ven. Mahā Kaccāna and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there, he said to Ven. Mahā Kaccāna, “Just now, venerable sir, as I was alone in seclusion,
ud5.6:12.1 | P: “Idha mayhaṁ, bhante, rahogatassa paṭisallīnassa evaṁ cetaso parivitakko udapādi: | T: this train of thought appeared to my awareness:
ud5.6:12.2 | P: ‘na kho me so bhagavā sammukhā diṭṭho, api ca sutoyeva me— | T: ‘I haven’t seen the Blessed One face-to-face.
ud5.6:12.3 | P: so bhagavā īdiso ca īdiso cā’ti. | T: I’ve simply heard that he is like this and like this.
ud5.6:12.4 | P: Sace maṁ upajjhāyo anujāneyya, gaccheyyāhaṁ taṁ bhagavantaṁ dassanāya arahantaṁ sammāsambuddhan”ti. | T: If my preceptor would give me permission, I would go to see the Blessed One, worthy & rightly self-awakened.’”
ud5.6:13.1 | S: “Good, good, Soṇa! | T: “Good, Soṇa. Very good.
ud5.6:13.2 | S: Go to see the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. | T: Go, Soṇa, to see the Blessed One, worthy & rightly self-awakened.
ud5.6:13.3 | S: You will see that Blessed One who is impressive and inspiring, with peaceful faculties and heart, attained to the highest self-control and serenity, like an elephant with tamed, guarded, and controlled faculties. | T: You will see the Blessed One who is serene & inspires serene confidence, his senses at peace, his mind at peace, one who has attained the utmost tranquility & poise, tamed, guarded, his senses restrained, a Great One (nāga).
ud5.6:13.4 | S: On seeing him, in my name bow with your head to his feet. Ask him if he is healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably, saying, | T: On seeing him, showing reverence with your head to his feet in my name, ask whether he is free from illness & affliction, is carefree, strong, & living in comfort, [saying:
ud5.6:13.5 | S: ‘Sir, my mentor Venerable Mahākaccāna bows with his head to your feet. He asks if you are healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably.’” | T: ‘My preceptor, lord, shows reverence with his head to your feet and asks whether you are free from illness & affliction, are carefree, strong, & living in comfort.’”]
ud5.6:14.1 | S: Saying, “Yes, sir,” Soṇa welcomed and agreed with Mahākaccāna’s words. He rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled Mahākaccāna, keeping him on his right. Then he set his lodgings in order and, taking his bowl and robe, set out for Sāvatthī. | T: Saying, “As you say, venerable sir,” Ven. Soṇa–delighting in & approving of Ven. Mahā Kaccāna’s words–got up from his seat, bowed down to Ven. Mahā Kaccāna, circled him to the right, set his lodging in order, and–taking his bowl & robes–set off wandering toward Sāvatthī.
ud5.6:14.2 | S: Eventually he came to Sāvatthī and Jeta’s Grove. He went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. | T: Wandering by stages, he arrived at Sāvatthī, Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. He went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there,
ud5.6:14.3 | S: Soṇa said to the Buddha, | T: he said to the Blessed One,
ud5.6:14.4 | S: “Sir, my mentor Venerable Mahākaccāna bows with his head to your feet. He asks if you are healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably.” | T: “Lord, my preceptor, Ven. Mahā Kaccāna, shows reverence with his head to the Blessed One’s feet and asks whether the Blessed One is free from illness & affliction, is carefree, strong, & living in comfort.”
ud5.6:15.1 | S: “I hope you’re keeping well, mendicant, I hope you’re all right. And I hope you have arrived from your journey unwearied, having had no trouble getting almsfood.” | T: “Are you well, monk? Are you in good health? Have you come along the road with only a little fatigue? And are you not tired of alms-food?”
ud5.6:15.2 | S: “I’m keeping well, Blessed One, I’m all right. And I have arrived from my journey unwearied, having had no trouble getting almsfood.” | T: “I am well, Blessed One. I am in good health, Blessed One. I have come along the road, lord, with only a little fatigue and I am not tired of alms-food.”
ud5.6:16.1 | S: Then the Buddha said to Venerable Ānanda, | T: Then the Blessed One addressed Ven. Ānanda, saying,
ud5.6:16.2 | S: “Prepare lodgings for this visiting mendicant.” | T: “Ānanda, prepare bedding for this visiting monk.”
ud5.6:16.3 | S: Then Venerable Ānanda thought, | T: Then the thought occurred to Ven. Ānanda,
ud5.6:16.4 | S: “When the Buddha orders me | T: “When the Blessed One orders me,
ud5.6:16.5 | S: to prepare lodgings for a specific mendicant, he wishes to stay in the same dwelling with that mendicant. The Buddha wishes to stay together with Venerable Soṇa.” | T: ‘Ānanda, prepare bedding for this visiting monk,’ he wants to stay in the same dwelling with that monk. The Blessed One wants to stay in the same dwelling with Ven. Soṇa.”
ud5.6:16.6 | S: He prepared lodgings for Soṇa in the same dwelling where the Buddha was staying. | T: So he prepared bedding for Ven. Soṇa in the dwelling in which the Blessed One was staying.
ud5.6:17.1 | S: The Buddha spent much of the night sitting meditation in the open. Then he got up from his seat, washed his feet, and entered the dwelling. | T: Then the Blessed One, having spent much of the night sitting in the open air, washed his feet and entered the dwelling. Likewise, Ven. Soṇa, having spent much of the night sitting in the open air, washed his feet and entered the dwelling. Then, getting up toward the end of the night,
ud5.6:17.2 | S: Venerable Soṇa did the same. | T: the Blessed One invited Ven. Mahā Soṇa,
ud5.6:17.3 | S: Then the Buddha rose at the crack of dawn and addressed Soṇa, | T: (none)
ud5.6:17.4 | S: “Speak some Dhamma, mendicant, as you feel inspired.” | T: saying, “Monk, I would like you to recite the Dhamma.”
ud5.6:18.1 | S: “Yes, sir,” replied Soṇa. He intoned all sixteen discourses in the Chapter of the Eights. | T: Responding, “As you say, lord,” to the Blessed One, Ven. Soṇa chanted all sixteen parts of the Aṭṭhaka Vagga.
ud5.6:18.2 | S: When Soṇa finished his intoning, the Buddha applauded, saying, | T: The Blessed One, at the conclusion of Ven. Soṇa’s intonation, expressed high approval:
ud5.6:18.3 | S: “Good, good, mendicant! You have learned the sixteen discourses of the Chapter of the Eights well, you have applied the mind and remembered it well. You are a good speaker, with a polished, clear, and articulate voice that expresses the meaning. | T: “Good, monk. Very good. You have learned the Aṭṭhaka Vagga [verses] well, have considered them well, have borne them well in mind. You have a fine delivery, clear & faultless, that makes the meaning intelligible.
ud5.6:18.4 | S: How many rains have you been ordained, mendicant?” | T: How many Rains [in the monkhood] do you have?”
ud5.6:18.5 | S: “I have one rains, Blessed One.” | T: “I have one Rains, Blessed One.”
ud5.6:18.6 | S: “But why did it take you so long to make it?” | T: “But why did you take so long [to ordain]?”
ud5.6:18.7 | S: “Sir, I have long seen the drawbacks of sensual pleasures, | T: “For a long time, lord, I have seen the drawbacks in sensuality,
ud5.6:18.8 | S: yet living in a house is cramped, with many duties and much to do.” | T: but the household life is confining with many duties, many things to be done.”
ud5.6:19.1 | S: Then, understanding this matter, on that occasion the Buddha expressed this heartfelt sentiment: | T: Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion exclaimed:
ud5.6:20.1 | S: “Seeing the danger of the world, | T: Seeing the drawbacks of the world,
ud5.6:20.2 | S: I understood the truth without attachments. | T: knowing the state without acquisitions,
ud5.6:20.3 | S: The Noble One does not delight in evil, | T: a noble one doesn’t find joy in evil,
ud5.6:20.4 | S: the Pure One does not delight in evil.” | T: in evil a clean one doesn’t find joy.

## mn41
mn41:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: I have heard that on one occasion,
mn41:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he arrived at a village of the Kosalan brahmins named Sālā. | T: while the Blessed One was on a wandering tour among the Kosalans with a large Saṅgha of monks, he arrived at a brahman village of the Kosalans called Sāla.
mn41:2.1 | S: The brahmins and householders of Sālā heard, | T: The brahman householders of Sāla heard it said:
mn41:2.2 | S: “It seems the ascetic Gotama—a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family—while wandering in the land of the Kosalans has arrived at Sālā, together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants. | T: “Gotama the contemplative—the son of the Sakyans, having gone forth from the Sakyan clan—on a wandering tour among the Kosalans with a large Saṅgha of monks—has arrived at Sāla.
mn41:2.3 | S: He has this good reputation: | T: And of that Master Gotama this fine reputation has spread:
mn41:2.4 | S: ‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ | T: ‘He is indeed a Blessed One, worthy & rightly self-awakened, consummate in clear-knowing & conduct, well-gone, an expert with regard to the cosmos, unexcelled trainer of people fit to be tamed, teacher of devas & human beings, awakened, blessed.
mn41:2.5 | S: He has realized with his own insight this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—and he makes it known to others. | T: He makes known—having realized it through direct knowledge—this world with its devas, Māras, & Brahmās, this generation with its contemplatives & brahmans, its royalty & commonfolk;
mn41:2.6 | S: He teaches Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. | T: he explains the Dhamma admirable in the beginning, admirable in the middle, admirable in the end;
mn41:2.7 | S: He reveals an entirely full and pure spiritual life. | T: he expounds the holy life both in its particulars & in its essence, entirely perfect & pure.
mn41:2.8 | S: It’s good to see such perfected ones.” | T: It is good to see such a worthy one.’”
mn41:3.1 | S: Then the brahmins and householders of Sālā went up to the Buddha. Before sitting down to one side, some bowed, some exchanged greetings and polite conversation, some held up their cupped palms toward the Buddha, some announced their name and clan, while some kept silent. Seated to one side they said to the Buddha: | T: So the brahman householders of Sāla went to the Blessed One. On arrival, some of them, bowing down to him, sat to one side. Some of them exchanged courteous greetings with him and, after an exchange of friendly greetings & courtesies, sat to one side. Some of them, placing their hands palm-to-palm over the heart in his direction, sat to one side. Some of them, announcing their name and clan in his presence, sat to one side. Some of them, remaining silent, sat to one side. As they were sitting there, the brahman householders of Sāla said to the Blessed One,
mn41:4.1 | S: “What is the cause, worthy Gotama, what is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell? | T: “What is the reason, Master Gotama, what is the condition, whereby some beings here, with the break-up of the body, after death, reappear in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell?
mn41:4.2 | S: And what is the cause, worthy Gotama, what is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm?” | T: And what is the reason, what is the condition, whereby some beings here, with the break-up of the body, after death, reappear in a good destination, a heavenly world?”
mn41:5.1 | S: “Unprincipled and immoral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: “Householders, it’s by reason of un-Dhamma conduct, dissonant conduct that some beings here, with the break-up of the body, after death, reappear in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.
mn41:5.2 | S: Principled and moral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.” | T: It’s by reason of Dhamma conduct, harmonious conduct that some beings here, with the break-up of the body, after death, reappear in a good destination, a heavenly world.”
mn41:6.1 | S: “We don’t understand the detailed meaning of the worthy Gotama’s brief statement. | T: “We don’t understand the detailed meaning of Master Gotama’s brief statement, the detailed meaning of what he hasn’t analyzed.
mn41:6.2 | S: Worthy Gotama, please teach us this matter in detail so we can understand the meaning.” | T: It would be good if Master Gotama would teach the Dhamma so that we would understand the detailed meaning of Master Gotama’s brief statement, the detailed meaning of what he hasn’t analyzed.”
mn41:6.3 | S: “Well then, householders, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.” | T: “Very well, in that case, householders, listen & pay careful attention. I will speak.”
mn41:6.4 | S: “Yes, worthy sir,” they replied. | T: “As you say, master,” the brahman householders of Sāla responded to the Blessed One.
mn41:6.5 | S: The Buddha said this: | T: The Blessed One said:
mn41:7.1 | S: “Householders, unprincipled and immoral conduct is threefold by way of body, fourfold by way of speech, and threefold by way of mind. | T: “Householders, there are three sorts of un-Dhamma conduct, dissonant conduct with the body; four sorts of un-Dhamma conduct, dissonant conduct with speech; and three sorts of un-Dhamma conduct, dissonant conduct with the mind.
mn41:8.1 | S: And how is unprincipled and immoral conduct threefold by way of body? | T: Unskillful Bodily Action “And how are there three sorts of un-Dhamma conduct, dissonant conduct with the body?
mn41:8.2 | S: It’s when someone kills living creatures. They’re violent, bloody-handed, a hardened killer, merciless to living beings. | T: “There is the case where a certain person takes life, is brutal, bloody-handed, devoted to killing & slaying, showing no mercy to living beings.
mn41:8.3 | S: They steal. With the intention to commit theft, they take the wealth or belongings of others from village or wilderness. | T: “He takes what is not given. He takes, in the manner of a thief, things in a village or a wilderness that belong to others and have not been given by them.
mn41:8.4 | S: They commit sexual misconduct. They have relations with women who have their mother, father, both mother and father, brother, sister, relatives, or clan as guardian. They have relations with a woman who is protected on principle, or who has a husband, or whose violation is punishable by law, or even one who has been garlanded as a token of betrothal. | T: “He engages in sensual misconduct. He gets sexually involved with those who are protected by their mothers, their fathers, their brothers, their sisters, their relatives, or their Dhamma; those with husbands, those who entail punishments, or even those crowned with flowers by another man.
mn41:8.5 | S: This is how unprincipled and immoral conduct is threefold by way of body. | T: “This is how there are three sorts of un-Dhamma conduct, dissonant conduct with the body.
mn41:9.1 | S: And how is unprincipled and immoral conduct fourfold by way of speech? | T: Unskillful Verbal Action “And how are there four sorts of un-Dhamma conduct, dissonant conduct with speech?
mn41:9.2 | S: It’s when someone lies. They’re summoned to a council, an assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to bear witness: ‘Please, my friend, say what you know.’ Not knowing, they say ‘I know.’ Knowing, they say ‘I don’t know.’ Not seeing, they say ‘I see.’ And seeing, they say ‘I don’t see.’ So they deliberately lie for the sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly reason. | T: “There is the case where a certain person engages in false speech. When he has been called to a town meeting, a group meeting, a gathering of his relatives, his guild, or of the royalty [i.e., a royal court proceeding], if he is asked as a witness, ‘Come & tell, good man, what you know’: If he doesn’t know, he says, ‘I know.’ If he does know, he says, ‘I don’t know.’ If he hasn’t seen, he says, ‘I have seen.’ If he has seen, he says, ‘I haven’t seen.’ Thus he consciously tells lies for his own sake, for the sake of another, or for the sake of a certain reward.
mn41:9.3 | S: They backbite. They repeat in one place what they heard in another so as to divide people against each other. And so they divide those who are harmonious, supporting division, delighting in division, loving division, speaking words that promote division. | T: “He engages in divisive speech. What he has heard here he tells there to break those people apart from these people here. What he has heard there he tells here to break these people apart from those people there. Thus breaking apart those who are united and stirring up strife between those who have broken apart, he loves factionalism, delights in factionalism, enjoys factionalism, speaks things that create factionalism.
mn41:9.4 | S: They speak harshly. They use the kinds of words that are cruel, nasty, hurtful, offensive, bordering on anger, not leading to immersion. | T: “He engages in abusive speech. He speaks words that are harsh, cutting, bitter to others, abusive of others, provoking anger and destroying concentration.
mn41:9.5 | S: They talk nonsense. Their speech is untimely, and is neither factual nor beneficial. It has nothing to do with the teaching or the training. Their words have no value, and are untimely, unreasonable, rambling, and pointless. | T: “He engages in idle chatter. He speaks out of season, speaks what isn’t factual, what isn’t in accordance with the goal, the Dhamma, & the Vinaya, words that are not worth treasuring: unseasonable, unreasonable, uncircumscribed, unconnected with the goal.
mn41:9.6 | S: This is how unprincipled and immoral conduct is fourfold by way of speech. | T: “This is how there are four sorts of un-Dhamma conduct, dissonant conduct with speech.
mn41:10.1 | S: And how is unprincipled and immoral conduct threefold by way of mind? | T: Unskillful Mental Action “And how are there three sorts of un-Dhamma conduct, dissonant conduct with the mind?
mn41:10.2 | S: It’s when someone is covetous. They covet the wealth and belongings of others: ‘Oh, if only their belongings were mine!’ | T: “There is the case where a certain person is covetous. He covets the belongings of others, thinking, ‘O, that what belongs to others would be mine!’
mn41:10.3 | S: They have ill will and malicious intentions: ‘May these sentient beings be killed, slaughtered, slain, destroyed, or annihilated!’ | T: “He bears ill will, corrupt in the resolves of his heart: ‘May these beings be killed or cut apart or crushed or destroyed, or may they not exist at all!’
mn41:10.4 | S: They have wrong view. Their perspective is distorted: | T: “He has wrong view, is warped in the way he sees things:
mn41:10.5 | S: ‘There’s no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There’s no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There’s no afterlife. There’s no such thing as mother and father, or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there’s no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ | T: ‘There is nothing given, nothing offered, nothing sacrificed. There is no fruit or result of good or bad actions. There is no this world, no next world, no mother, no father, no spontaneously reborn beings; no contemplatives or brahmans who, faring rightly & practicing rightly, proclaim this world & the next after having directly known & realized it for themselves.’
mn41:10.6 | S: This is how unprincipled and immoral conduct is threefold by way of mind. | T: “This is how there are three sorts of un-Dhamma conduct, dissonant conduct with the mind.
mn41:10.7 | S: That’s how unprincipled and immoral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: “It’s by reason of this un-Dhamma conduct & dissonant conduct that some beings here, with the break-up of the body, after death, re-appear in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.
mn41:11.1 | S: Householders, principled and moral conduct is threefold by way of body, fourfold by way of speech, and threefold by way of mind. | T: “Householders, there are three sorts of Dhamma conduct, harmonious conduct with the body; four sorts of Dhamma conduct, harmonious conduct with speech; and three sorts of Dhamma conduct, harmonious conduct with the mind.
mn41:12.1 | S: And how is principled and moral conduct threefold by way of body? | T: Skillful Bodily Action “And how are there three sorts of Dhamma conduct, harmonious conduct with the body?
mn41:12.2 | S: It’s when someone gives up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. They’re scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for all living beings. | T: “There is the case where a certain person, abandoning the taking of life, abstains from the taking of life. He dwells with his rod laid down, his knife laid down, scrupulous, merciful, compassionate for the welfare of all living beings. “Abandoning the taking of what is not given, he abstains from taking what is not given.
mn41:12.3 | S: They give up stealing. They don’t, with the intention to commit theft, take the wealth or belongings of others from village or wilderness. | T: He doesn’t take, in the manner of a thief, things in a village or a wilderness that belong to others and have not been given by them.
mn41:12.4 | S: They give up sexual misconduct. They don’t have relations with women who have their mother, father, both mother and father, brother, sister, relatives, or clan as guardian. They don’t have relations with a woman who is protected on principle, or who has a husband, or whose violation is punishable by law, or even one who has been garlanded as a token of betrothal. | T: “Abandoning sensual misconduct, he abstains from sensual misconduct. He doesn’t get sexually involved with those who are protected by their mothers, their fathers, their brothers, their sisters, their relatives, or their Dhamma; those with husbands, those who entail punishments, or even those crowned with flowers by another man.
mn41:12.5 | S: This is how principled and moral conduct is threefold by way of body. | T: “This is how there are three sorts of Dhamma conduct, harmonious conduct with the body.
mn41:13.1 | S: And how is principled and moral conduct fourfold by way of speech? | T: Skillful Verbal Action “And how are there three sorts of Dhamma conduct, harmonious conduct with speech?
mn41:13.2 | S: It’s when someone gives up lying. They’re summoned to a council, an assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to bear witness: ‘Please, my friend, say what you know.’ Not knowing, they say ‘I don’t know.’ Knowing, they say ‘I know.’ Not seeing, they say ‘I don’t see.’ And seeing, they say ‘I see.’ So they don’t deliberately lie for the sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly reason. | T: “There is the case where a certain person, abandoning false speech, abstains from false speech. When he has been called to a town meeting, a group meeting, a gathering of his relatives, his guild, or of the royalty, if he is asked as a witness, ‘Come & tell, good man, what you know’: If he doesn’t know, he says, ‘I don’t know.’ If he does know, he says, ‘I know.’ If he hasn’t seen, he says, ‘I haven’t seen.’ If he has seen, he says, ‘I have seen.’ Thus he doesn’t consciously tell a lie for his own sake, for the sake of another, or for the sake of any reward.
mn41:13.3 | S: They give up backbiting. They don’t repeat in one place what they heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead, they reconcile those who are divided and support those who are united, delighting in harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony. | T: “Abandoning divisive speech he abstains from divisive speech. What he has heard here he doesn’t tell there to break those people apart from these people here. What he has heard there he doesn’t tell here to break these people apart from those people there. Thus reconciling those who have broken apart or cementing those who are united, he loves concord, delights in concord, enjoys concord, speaks things that create concord.
mn41:13.4 | S: They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way that’s mellow, pleasing to the ear, endearing, going to the heart, polite, likable, and agreeable to the people. | T: “Abandoning abusive speech, he abstains from abusive speech. He speaks words that are soothing, pleasing to the ear, that are affectionate, that go to the heart, that are polite, appealing & pleasing to people at large.
mn41:13.5 | S: They give up talking nonsense. Their words are timely, true, and meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. They say things at the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial. | T: “Abandoning idle chatter, he abstains from idle chatter. He speaks in season, speaks what is factual, what is in accordance with the goal, the Dhamma, & the Vinaya. He speaks words worth treasuring, seasonable, reasonable, circumscribed, connected with the goal.
mn41:13.6 | S: This is how principled and moral conduct is fourfold by way of speech. | T: “This is how there are four sorts of Dhamma conduct, harmonious conduct with speech.
mn41:14.1 | S: And how is principled and moral conduct threefold by way of mind? | T: Skillful Mental Action “And how are there three sorts of Dhamma conduct, harmonious conduct with the mind?
mn41:14.2 | S: It’s when someone is not covetous. They don’t covet the wealth and belongings of others: ‘Oh, if only their belongings were mine!’ | T: “There is the case where a certain person is not covetous. He doesn’t covet the belongings of others, thinking, ‘O, that what belongs to others would be mine!’
mn41:14.3 | S: They have a kind heart and loving intentions: ‘May these sentient beings live free of enmity and ill will, untroubled and happy!’ | T: “He bears no ill will and is not corrupt in the resolves of his heart. (He thinks,) ‘May these beings be free from animosity, free from oppression, free from trouble, and may they look after themselves with ease!’
mn41:14.4 | S: They have right view, an undistorted perspective: | T: (none)
mn41:14.5 | S: ‘There is meaning in giving, sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother and father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ | T: “He has right view and is not warped in the way he sees things: ‘There is what is given, what is offered, what is sacrificed. There are fruits & results of good & bad actions. There is this world & the next world. There is mother & father. There are spontaneously reborn beings; there are contemplatives & brahmans who, faring rightly & practicing rightly, proclaim this world & the next after having directly known & realized it for themselves.’
mn41:14.6 | S: This is how principled and moral conduct is threefold by way of mind. | T: “This is how there are three sorts of Dhamma conduct, harmonious conduct with the mind.
mn41:14.7 | S: This is how principled and moral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. | T: “It’s by reason of this Dhamma conduct & harmonious conduct that some beings here, with the break-up of the body, after death, re-appear in a good destination, a heavenly world.
mn41:15.1 | S: Someone of principled and moral conduct might wish: | T: “Householders, if one—a person of Dhamma conduct, harmonious conduct—should wish:
mn41:15.2 | S: ‘If only, when my body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of well-to-do aristocrats!’ | T: ‘O if I, with the break-up of the body, after death, were to reappear among well-to-do noble warriors,’ it is possible that one—with the break-up of the body, after death—would appear among well-to-do noble warriors.
mn41:15.3 | S: It’s possible that this might happen. | T: (none)
mn41:15.4 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn41:15.5 | S: Because they have principled and moral conduct. | T: Because one is a person of Dhamma conduct, harmonious conduct.
mn41:16-17.1 | S: Someone of principled and moral conduct might wish: | T: “If one—a person of Dhamma conduct, harmonious conduct—should wish:
mn41:16-17.2 | S: ‘If only, when my body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of well-to-do brahmins … | T: ‘O if I, with the break-up of the body, after death, were to reappear among well-to-do brahmans,’ it is possible that one—with the break-up of the body, after death—would appear among well-to-do brahmans. Why is that? Because one is a person of Dhamma conduct, harmonious conduct. “If one—a person of Dhamma conduct, harmonious conduct—should wish: ‘O if I, with the break-up of the body, after death, were to reappear among well-to-do householders,’ it is possible that one—with the break-up of the body, after death—
mn41:16-17.3 | S: well-to-do householders … | T: would appear among well-to-do householders.
mn41:16-17.5 | P: Taṁ kissa hetu? | T: Why is that?
mn41:16-17.6 | P: Tathā hi so dhammacārī samacārī. | T: Because one is a person of Dhamma conduct, harmonious conduct.
mn41:18-42.1 | P: Ākaṅkheyya ce, gahapatayo, dhammacārī samacārī: | T: “If one—a person of Dhamma conduct, harmonious conduct—should wish:
mn41:18-42.2 | S: the gods of the four great kings … | T: ‘O if I, with the break-up of the body, after death, were to reappear among the Devas of the Four Great Kings,’ it is possible that one—with the break-up of the body, after death—would appear among the Devas of the Four Great Kings.
mn41:18-42.4 | P: Taṁ kissa hetu? | T: Why is that?
mn41:18-42.5 | P: Tathā hi so dhammacārī samacārī. | T: Because one is a person of Dhamma conduct, harmonious conduct.
mn41:18-42.6 | P: Ākaṅkheyya ce, gahapatayo, dhammacārī samacārī: | T: “If one—a person of Dhamma conduct, harmonious conduct—should wish:
mn41:18-42.7 | S: the gods of the thirty-three … | T: ‘O if I, with the break-up of the body, after death, were to reappear among the Devas of the Thirty-three…
mn41:18-42.8 | S: the gods of Yama … | T: the Devas of the Hours…
mn41:18-42.9 | S: the joyful gods … | T: the Contented devas…
mn41:18-42.10 | S: the gods who love to create … | T: the devas Delighting in Creation…
mn41:18-42.11 | S: the gods who control what is created by others … | T: the devas Wielding Power over the Creations of Others,’ it is possible that one—with the break-up of the body, after death—would appear among the devas Wielding Power over the Creations of Others.
mn41:18-42.12 | S: the gods of the Divinity’s host … | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.14 | P: Taṁ kissa hetu? | T: Why is that?
mn41:18-42.15 | P: Tathā hi so dhammacārī samacārī. | T: Because one is a person of Dhamma conduct, harmonious conduct.
mn41:18-42.16 | P: Ākaṅkheyya ce, gahapatayo, dhammacārī samacārī: | T: “If one—a person of Dhamma conduct, harmonious conduct—should wish:
mn41:18-42.17 | S: the luminous gods … | T: ‘O if I, with the break-up of the body, after death, were to reappear among the devas in Brahmā’s retinue…
mn41:18-42.22 | S: the gods of limited luminosity … | T: the Radiant devas… the Devas of Limited Radiance…
mn41:18-42.23 | S: the gods of limitless luminosity … | T: the Devas of Immeasurable Radiance… the Devas of Streaming Radiance…
mn41:18-42.24 | S: the gods of sublime luminosity … | T: the Beautiful devas …
mn41:18-42.25 | S: the gods of limited beauty … | T: the Devas of Limited Beauty…
mn41:18-42.26 | S: the gods of limitless beauty … | T: the Devas of Immeasurable Beauty…
mn41:18-42.27 | S: the gods of universal beauty … | T: the Beautiful Black devas…
mn41:18-42.28 | S: the gods of abundant fruit … | T: the Sky-fruit devas,’ it is possible that one—with the break-up of the body, after death—would appear among the Sky-fruit devas.
mn41:18-42.29 | S: the gods of Aviha … | T: Why is that?
mn41:18-42.30 | S: the gods of Atappa … | T: Because one is a person of Dhamma conduct, harmonious conduct. “If one—a person of Dhamma conduct, harmonious conduct—should wish: ‘O if I, with the break-up of the body, after death, were to reappear among the Not Falling Away devas… the Untroubled devas…
mn41:18-42.31 | S: the gods fair to see … | T: the Good-looking devas…
mn41:18-42.32 | S: the fair seeing gods … | T: the Clear-seeing devas…
mn41:18-42.33 | S: the gods of Akaniṭṭha … | T: the Peerless devas,’ it is possible that one—with the break-up of the body, after death—would appear among the Peerless devas. Why is that? Because one is a person of Dhamma conduct, harmonious conduct.
mn41:18-42.34 | S: the gods of the dimension of infinite space … | T: “If one—a person of Dhamma conduct, harmonious conduct—should wish: ‘O if I, with the break-up of the body, after death, were to reappear among the devas who have reached the dimension of the infinitude of space…
mn41:18-42.35 | S: the gods of the dimension of infinite consciousness … | T: the devas who have reached the dimension of the infinitude of consciousness…
mn41:18-42.36 | S: the gods of the dimension of nothingness … | T: the devas who have reached the dimension of nothingness…
mn41:18-42.37 | S: the gods of the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception.’ | T: the devas who have reached the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception,’ it is possible that one—with the break-up of the body, after death—would appear among the devas who have reached the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception.
mn41:18-42.38 | S: It’s possible that this might happen. | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.39 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn41:18-42.40 | S: Because they have principled and moral conduct. | T: Because one is a person of Dhamma conduct, harmonious conduct.
mn41:43.1 | S: Someone of principled and moral conduct might wish: | T: “If one—a person of Dhamma conduct, harmonious conduct—should wish:
mn41:43.2 | S: ‘If only I might realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, and live having realized it with my own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements.’ | T: ‘O if I—with the ending of the effluents—were to enter & remain in the effluent-free awareness-release & discernment-release, having directly known and realized them for myself right in the here & now,’ it is possible that one—with the ending of the effluents—would enter & remain in the effluent-free awareness-release & discernment-release, having directly known and realized them for oneself right in the here & now.
mn41:43.3 | S: It’s possible that this might happen. | T: (none)
mn41:43.4 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn41:43.5 | S: Because they have principled and moral conduct.” | T: Because one is a person of Dhamma conduct, harmonious conduct.”
mn41:44.1 | S: When he had spoken, the brahmins and householders of Sālā said to the Buddha, | T: When this was said, the brahman householders of Sāla said to the Blessed One:
mn41:44.2 | S: “Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! | T: “Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent!
mn41:44.3 | S: As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, worthy Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. | T: Just as if he were to place upright what was overturned, to reveal what was hidden, to show the way to one who was lost, or to carry a lamp into the dark so that those with eyes could see forms, in the same way has Master Gotama—through many lines of reasoning—made the Dhamma clear.
mn41:44.4 | S: We go for refuge to the worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. | T: We go to Master Gotama for refuge, to the Dhamma, & to the Saṅgha of monks.
mn41:44.5 | S: From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember us as lay followers who have gone for refuge for life.” | T: May Master Gotama remember us as lay followers who have gone for refuge from this day forward, for life.”

## mn69
mn69:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: (none)
mn69:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground. | T: I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Rājagaha in the Bamboo Forest, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.
mn69:2.1 | S: Now at that time a wilderness mendicant of boorish behavior named Gulissāni had come down to the midst of the Saṅgha on some business. | T: And on that occasion a monk named Golissāni, a wilderness-dweller of crude behavior, had entered into the midst of the Saṅgha on some business or other.
mn69:2.2 | S: There Venerable Sāriputta spoke to the mendicants about Gulissāni: | T: Then Ven. Sāriputta, with reference to the monk named Golissāni, addressed the monks:
mn69:3.1 | S: “Reverends, a wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha should have respect and reverence for his spiritual companions. | T: “Friends, when a wilderness-dwelling monk has come into the Saṅgha and is living in the Saṅgha, it should be with respect and with deference toward his fellows in the holy life. If a wilderness-dwelling monk, coming into the Saṅgha and living in the Saṅgha, is not respectful or deferential toward his fellows in the holy life,
mn69:3.2 | S: If he doesn’t, there’ll be some who say: | T: there are those who would say of him,
mn69:3.3 | S: ‘What’s the point of this wilderness venerable’s staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he has no respect and reverence for his spiritual companions?’ | T: ‘What good has it done for this venerable wilderness-dweller to be alone in the wilderness, living independently, when he is not respectful or deferential toward his fellows in the holy life?’
mn69:3.4 | P: tassa bhavanti vattāro. | T: Because there are those who would say that of him,
mn69:3.5 | S: That’s why a wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha should have respect and reverence for his spiritual companions. | T: when a wilderness-dwelling monk has come into the Saṅgha and is living in the Saṅgha, it should be with respect and with deference toward his fellows in the holy life.
mn69:4.1 | S: A wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha should be careful where he sits, thinking: | T: “When a wilderness-dwelling monk has come into the Saṅgha and is living in the Saṅgha, he should be skilled with regard to seats, (thinking,)
mn69:4.2 | S: ‘I shall sit so that I don’t intrude on the senior monks and I don’t block the junior monks from a seat.’ | T: ‘I will sit without encroaching on the elder monks, and not preempting the new monks from a seat.’
mn69:4.3 | S: If he doesn’t, there’ll be some who say: | T: (none)
mn69:4.4 | S: ‘What’s the point of this wilderness venerable’s staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he’s not careful where he sits?’ | T: (none)
mn69:4.6 | S: That’s why a wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha should be careful where he sits. | T: (none)
mn69:4.7 | S: A wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha should know even the supplementary regulations. | T: If a wilderness-dwelling monk, coming into the Saṅgha and living in the Saṅgha, is not skilled with regard to seats,
mn69:4.8 | S: If he doesn’t, there’ll be some who say: | T: there are those who would say of him,
mn69:4.9 | S: ‘What’s the point of this wilderness venerable’s staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he doesn’t even know the supplementary regulations?’ | T: ‘What good has it done for this venerable wilderness-dweller to be alone in the wilderness, living independently, when he doesn’t know even a point of good conduct?’
mn69:4.10 | P: tassa bhavanti vattāro. | T: Because there are those who would say that of him,
mn69:4.11 | S: That’s why a wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha should know even the supplementary regulations. | T: when a wilderness-dwelling monk has come into the Saṅgha and is living in the Saṅgha, he should be skilled with regard to seats. “When a wilderness-dwelling monk has come into the Saṅgha and is living in the Saṅgha,
mn69:5.1 | S: A wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha shouldn’t enter the village too early or return too late in the day. | T: he should not enter the village too early or return too late in the day. If a wilderness-dwelling monk, coming into the Saṅgha and living in the Saṅgha, enters the village too early and returns too late in the day,
mn69:5.2 | S: If he does so, there’ll be some who say: | T: there are those who would say of him,
mn69:5.3 | S: ‘What’s the point of this wilderness venerable’s staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he enters the village too early or returns too late in the day?’ | T: ‘What good has it done for this venerable wilderness-dweller to be alone in the wilderness, living independently, when he enters the village too early and returns too late in the day?’
mn69:5.4 | P: tassa bhavanti vattāro. | T: Because there are those who would say that of him,
mn69:5.5 | S: That’s why a wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha shouldn’t enter the village too early or return too late in the day. | T: when a wilderness-dwelling monk has come into the Saṅgha and is living in the Saṅgha, he should not enter the village too early or return too late in the day.
mn69:6.1 | S: A wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha shouldn’t have relations with  families before or after the meal. | T: “When a wilderness-dwelling monk has come into the Saṅgha and is living in the Saṅgha, he should not go calling on families before or after the meal. If a wilderness-dwelling monk, coming into the Saṅgha and living in the Saṅgha, goes calling on families before or after the meal,
mn69:6.2 | S: If he does so, there’ll be some who say: | T: there are those who would say of him,
mn69:6.3 | S: ‘This wilderness venerable, staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, must be used to wandering about at the wrong time, since he behaves like this when he’s come to the Saṅgha.’ | T: ‘Surely this venerable wilderness-dweller, alone in the wilderness, living independently, spends his time making untimely visits, given that he behaves this way even when he has come into the Saṅgha.’
mn69:6.4 | P: tassa bhavanti vattāro. | T: Because there are those who would say that of him,
mn69:6.5 | S: That’s why a wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha shouldn’t have relations with families before or after the meal. | T: when a wilderness-dwelling monk has come into the Saṅgha and is living in the Saṅgha, he should not go calling on families before or after the meal.
mn69:7.1 | S: A wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha shouldn’t be restless and fickle. | T: “When a wilderness-dwelling monk has come into the Saṅgha and is living in the Saṅgha, he should not be high-strung & unruly. If a wilderness-dwelling monk, coming into the Saṅgha and living in the Saṅgha, is high-strung & unruly,
mn69:7.2 | S: If he is, there’ll be some who say: | T: there are those who would say of him,
mn69:7.3 | S: ‘This wilderness venerable, staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, must be used to being restless and fickle, since he behaves like this when he’s come to the Saṅgha.’ | T: ‘Surely this venerable wilderness-dweller, alone in the wilderness, living independently, spends his time being high-strung & unruly, given that he behaves this way even in the Saṅgha.’
mn69:7.4 | P: tassa bhavanti vattāro. | T: Because there are those who would say that of him,
mn69:7.5 | S: That’s why a wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha shouldn’t be restless and fickle. | T: when a wilderness-dwelling monk has come into the Saṅgha and is living in the Saṅgha, he should not be high-strung & unruly.
mn69:8.1 | S: A wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha shouldn’t be scurrilous and loose-tongued. | T: “When a wilderness-dwelling monk has come into the Saṅgha and is living in the Saṅgha, he should not be talkative & loose in his words. If a wilderness-dwelling monk, coming into the Saṅgha and living in the Saṅgha, is talkative & loose in his words,
mn69:8.2 | S: If he is, there’ll be some who say: | T: there are those who would say of him,
mn69:8.3 | S: ‘What’s the point of this wilderness venerable’s staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he’s scurrilous and loose-tongued?’ | T: ‘What good has it done for this venerable wilderness-dweller to be alone in the wilderness, living independently, when he is talkative & loose in his words?’
mn69:8.4 | P: tassa bhavanti vattāro. | T: Because there are those who would say that of him,
mn69:8.5 | S: That’s why a wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha shouldn’t be scurrilous and loose-tongued. | T: when a wilderness-dwelling monk has come into the Saṅgha and is living in the Saṅgha, he should not be talkative & loose in his words.
mn69:9.1 | S: A wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha should be easy to admonish, with good friends. | T: “When a wilderness-dwelling monk has come into the Saṅgha and is living in the Saṅgha, he should be easy to instruct & have admirable friends. If a wilderness-dwelling monk,
mn69:9.2 | S: If he’s hard to admonish, with bad friends, there’ll be some who say: | T: coming into the Saṅgha and living in the Saṅgha, is hard to instruct & has evil friends, there are those who would say of him,
mn69:9.3 | S: ‘What’s the point of this wilderness venerable’s staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he’s hard to admonish, with bad friends?’ | T: ‘What good has it done for this venerable wilderness-dweller to be alone in the wilderness, living independently, when he is hard to instruct & has evil friends?’
mn69:9.4 | P: tassa bhavanti vattāro. | T: Because there are those who would say that of him,
mn69:9.5 | S: That’s why a wilderness monk who has come to stay in the Saṅgha should be easy to admonish, with good friends. | T: when a wilderness-dwelling monk has come into the Saṅgha and is living in the Saṅgha, he should be easy to instruct & have admirable friends.
mn69:10.1 | S: A wilderness monk should guard the sense doors. | T: “A wilderness-dwelling monk should guard the doors of his senses. If a wilderness-dwelling monk does not guard the doors of his senses,
mn69:10.2 | S: If he doesn’t, there’ll be some who say: | T: there are those who would say of him,
mn69:10.3 | S: ‘What’s the point of this wilderness venerable’s staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he doesn’t guard the sense doors?’ | T: ‘What good has it done for this venerable wilderness-dweller to be alone in the wilderness, living independently, when he doesn’t guard the doors to his senses?’
mn69:10.4 | P: tassa bhavanti vattāro. | T: Because there are those who would say that of him,
mn69:10.5 | S: That’s why a wilderness monk should guard the sense doors. | T: a wilderness-dwelling monk should guard the doors of his senses.
mn69:11.1 | S: A wilderness monk should eat in moderation. | T: “A wilderness-dwelling monk should know moderation in eating. If a wilderness-dwelling monk doesn’t know moderation in eating,
mn69:11.2 | S: If he doesn’t, there’ll be some who say: | T: there are those who would say of him,
mn69:11.3 | S: ‘What’s the point of this wilderness venerable’s staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he eats too much?’ | T: ‘What good has it done for this venerable wilderness-dweller to be alone in the wilderness, living independently,
mn69:11.5 | S: That’s why a wilderness monk should eat in moderation. | T: when he doesn’t know moderation in eating?’ Because there are those who would say that of him, a wilderness-dwelling monk should know moderation in eating.
mn69:12.1 | S: A wilderness monk should be committed to wakefulness. | T: “A wilderness-dwelling monk should be devoted to wakefulness. If a wilderness-dwelling monk is not devoted to wakefulness,
mn69:12.2 | S: If he isn’t, there’ll be some who say: | T: there are those who would say of him,
mn69:12.3 | S: ‘What’s the point of this wilderness venerable’s staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he’s not committed to wakefulness?’ | T: ‘What good has it done for this venerable wilderness-dweller to be alone in the wilderness, living independently, when he isn’t devoted to wakefulness?’
mn69:12.4 | P: tassa bhavanti vattāro. | T: Because there are those who would say that of him,
mn69:12.5 | S: That’s why a wilderness monk should be committed to wakefulness. | T: a wilderness-dwelling monk should be devoted to wakefulness.
mn69:13.1 | S: A wilderness monk should be energetic. | T: “A wilderness-dwelling monk should be one with aroused persistence.
mn69:13.2 | S: If he isn’t, there’ll be some who say: | T: If a wilderness-dwelling monk is lazy, there are those who would say of him,
mn69:13.3 | S: ‘What’s the point of this wilderness venerable’s staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he’s not energetic?’ | T: ‘What good has it done for this venerable wilderness-dweller to be alone in the wilderness, living independently, when he is lazy?’
mn69:13.4 | P: tassa bhavanti vattāro. | T: Because there are those who would say that of him,
mn69:13.5 | S: That’s why a wilderness monk should be energetic. | T: a wilderness-dwelling monk should be one with aroused persistence.
mn69:14.1 | S: A wilderness monk should be mindful. | T: “A wilderness-dwelling monk should be one with established mindfulness. If a wilderness-dwelling monk is confused in his mindfulness,
mn69:14.2 | S: If he isn’t, there’ll be some who say: | T: there are those who would say of him,
mn69:14.3 | S: ‘What’s the point of this wilderness venerable’s staying alone and autonomous in the wilderness, since he’s not mindful?’ | T: ‘What good has it done for this venerable wilderness-dweller to be alone in the wilderness, living independently, when he is confused in his mindfulness?’
mn69:14.4 | P: tassa bhavanti vattāro. | T: Because there are those who would say that of him,
mn69:14.5 | S: That’s why a wilderness monk should be mindful. | T: a wilderness-dwelling monk should be one with established mindfulness.
mn69:15.1 | S: A wilderness monk should have immersion. | T: “A wilderness-dwelling monk should be one with concentration. If a wilderness-dwelling monk is without concentration,
mn69:15.2 | S: If he doesn’t, there’ll be some who say: | T: there are those who would say of him,
