## ud3.3
ud3.3:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: (none)
ud3.3:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. | T: I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Sāvatthī at Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.
ud3.3:1.3 | S: Now at that time five hundred mendicants headed by Yasoja arrived at Sāvatthī to see the Buddha. | T: And on that occasion approximately 500 monks, headed by Ven. Yasoja, had arrived in Sāvatthī to see the Blessed One.
ud3.3:1.4 | S: At that, those visiting mendicants, while exchanging pleasantries with the resident mendicants, preparing their lodgings, and putting away their bowls and robes, made a colossal racket. | T: As these visiting monks were exchanging greetings with the resident monks, setting their lodgings in order, and putting away their robes & bowls, they made a loud racket, a great racket.
ud3.3:2.1 | S: Then the Buddha said to Venerable Ānanda, | T: Then the Blessed One said to Ven. Ānanda,
ud3.3:2.2 | S: “Ānanda, who’s making that colossal racket? You’d think it was fishermen hauling in a catch!” | T: “Ānanda, what is that loud racket, that great racket like fishermen with a catch of fish?”
ud3.3:2.3 | S: “Sir, those five hundred mendicants headed by Yasoja have arrived at Sāvatthī to see the Buddha. | T: “Lord, those are approximately 500 monks, headed by Ven. Yasoja, who have arrived in Sāvatthī to see the Blessed One.
ud3.3:2.4 | S: It’s those visiting mendicants who, while exchanging pleasantries with the resident mendicants, preparing their lodgings, and putting away their bowls and robes, made a colossal racket.” | T: As these visiting monks are exchanging greetings with the resident monks, setting their lodgings in order, and putting away their robes & bowls, they are making a loud racket, a great racket.”
ud3.3:2.5 | S: “Well then, Ānanda, in my name tell those mendicants that | T: “In that case, Ānanda, tell those monks in my name,
ud3.3:2.6 | S: the Teacher summons them.” | T: ‘The Teacher calls you, friends.’”
ud3.3:3.1 | S: “Yes, sir,” Ānanda replied. He went to those mendicants and said, | T: Responding, “As you say, lord,” to the Blessed One, Ven. Ānanda went to the monks and said,
ud3.3:3.2 | S: “Venerables, the Teacher summons you.” | T: “The Teacher calls you,
ud3.3:3.3 | S: “Yes, reverend,” replied those mendicants. Then they rose from their seats and went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to them, | T: friends.” Responding, “As you say, friend,” to Ven. Ānanda, the monks went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As they were sitting there, the Blessed One said to them,
ud3.3:4.1 | S: “Mendicants, what’s with that colossal racket? You’d think it was fishermen hauling in a catch!” | T: “Monks, why were you making that loud racket, that great racket, like fishermen with a catch of fish?”
ud3.3:4.2 | S: When he said this, Venerable Yasoja said to the Buddha, | T: When this was said, Ven. Yasoja said to the Blessed One,
ud3.3:4.3 | S: “Sir, these five hundred mendicants have arrived at Sāvatthī to see the Buddha. | T: “Lord, these 500 monks have arrived in Sāvatthī to see the Blessed One.
ud3.3:4.4 | S: It’s these visiting mendicants who, while exchanging pleasantries with the resident mendicants, preparing their lodgings, and putting away their bowls and robes, made a colossal racket.” | T: As they were exchanging greetings with the resident monks, setting their lodgings in order, and putting away their robes & bowls, they made a loud racket, a great racket.”
ud3.3:4.5 | S: “Go away, mendicants, I dismiss you. You are not to stay in my presence.” | T: “Go away, monks. I dismiss you. You are not to stay in my vicinity.”
ud3.3:5.1 | S: “Yes, sir,” replied those mendicants. They got up from their seats, bowed and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on their right. They set their lodgings in order and left, taking their bowls and robes. | T: Responding, “As you say, lord,” to the Blessed One, the monks got up from their seats, bowed down to the Blessed One, and left, circling him to the right. Setting their lodgings in order and taking their robes & bowls,
ud3.3:5.2 | S: Traveling stage by stage in the land of the Vajjis, they arrived at the Vaggumudā River. They built leaf huts near the riverbank and there they entered the rainy season. | T: they went wandering among the Vajjians. After wandering by stages among the Vajjians, they came to the River Vaggamudā. There on the bank of the River Vaggamudā they made leaf-huts and entered the Rains Retreat.
ud3.3:6.1 | S: Then Venerable Yasoja, having entered the rainy season, addressed the mendicants: | T: Then Ven. Yasoja addressed the monks as they entered the Rains Retreat:
ud3.3:6.2 | S: “Out of sympathy, reverends, the Buddha dismissed us, wanting what’s best for us. | T: “Friends, the Blessed One dismissed us, wishing for our benefit, seeking our wellbeing, being sympathetic, and acting out of sympathy.
ud3.3:6.3 | S: Come, let us live in such a way that the Buddha would be pleased with us.” | T: Let’s live in such a way that the Blessed One will be gratified by our way of living.”
ud3.3:6.4 | S: “Yes, reverend,” they replied. | T: “As you say, friend,” the monks responded to Ven. Yasoja.
ud3.3:6.5 | S: Then those mendicants, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, all realized the three knowledges in that same rainy season. | T: And so, living secluded, ardent, & resolute, every one of them realized the Three Knowledges [remembrance of past lives, knowledge of the arising & passing away of living beings, and knowledge of the ending of mental effluents] in the course of that very Rains Retreat.
ud3.3:7.1 | S: When the Buddha had stayed in Sāvatthī as long as he pleased, he set out for Vesālī. | T: Then the Blessed One, having stayed as long as he liked in Sāvatthī, went wandering in the direction of Vesālī.
ud3.3:7.2 | S: Traveling stage by stage, he arrived at Vesālī, | T: After wandering by stages,
ud3.3:7.3 | S: where he stayed in the hall with the peaked roof. | T: he arrived in Vesālī and stayed there in the Gabled Pavilion in the Great Forest.
ud3.3:8.1 | S: Then, having applied his mind to comprehending the minds of the mendicants staying on the bank of the Vaggumudā River, the Buddha said to Venerable Ānanda, | T: Then, encompassing with his awareness the awareness of the monks staying on the bank of the River Vaggamudā, he said to Ven. Ānanda,
ud3.3:8.2 | S: “A light, it appears to me, has arisen in this quarter, Ānanda; a brightness has arisen. | T: “This direction seems bright to me, Ānanda. This direction seems dazzling to me.
ud3.3:8.3 | S: I’m not put off at the thought of going to where the mendicants are staying on the bank of the Vaggumudā River. | T: It’s not at all repugnant for me to go & pay attention to where the monks on the bank of the River Vaggamudā are staying.
ud3.3:8.4 | S: Send a message to those mendicants: | T: Send a messenger into their presence to say,
ud3.3:8.5 | S: ‘Venerables, the Teacher summons you. He wants to see you.’” | T: ‘The Teacher calls you, friends. The Teacher wants to see you.’”
ud3.3:9.1 | S: “Yes, sir,” Ānanda replied. He went to one of the mendicants and said, | T: Responding, “As you say, lord,” to the Blessed One, Ven. Ānanda went to a certain monk and said,
ud3.3:9.2 | S: “Please, Reverend, go to the mendicants staying on the bank of the Vaggumudā River and say to them, | T: “Come now, friend. Go to the monks on the bank of the River Vaggamudā and say to them,
ud3.3:9.3 | S: ‘Venerables, the Teacher summons you. He wants to see you.’” | T: ‘The Teacher calls you, friends. The Teacher wants to see you.’”
ud3.3:10.1 | S: “Yes, reverend,” replied that mendicant. | T: Responding, “As you say, friend,” to Ven. Ānanda, the monk–
ud3.3:10.2 | S: Then, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, he vanished from the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof, and reappeared in front of those mendicants on the bank of the Vaggumudā River. | T: just as a strong man might extend his flexed arm or flex his extended arm–disappeared from the Gabled Pavilion in the Great Forest and appeared in front of the monks on the bank of the River Vaggamudā.
ud3.3:10.3 | S: Then he said to those mendicants, | T: Then he said to them,
ud3.3:10.4 | S: “Venerables, the Teacher summons you. He wants to see you.” | T: “The Teacher calls you, friends. The Teacher wants to see you.”
ud3.3:11.1 | S: “Yes, reverend,” replied those mendicants. They set their lodgings in order and took their bowls and robes. | T: Responding, “As you say, friend,” to the monk, the monks set their lodgings in order and, taking their robes & bowls,
ud3.3:11.2 | S: Then, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, they vanished from the bank of the Vaggumudā River, and reappeared in the presence of the Buddha in the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. | T: disappeared from the bank of the River Vaggamudā–just as a strong man might extend his flexed arm or flex his extended arm–and appeared in the presence of the Blessed One in the Gabled Pavilion in the Great Forest.
ud3.3:11.3 | S: But at that time the Buddha was sitting immersed in imperturbable meditation. | T: Now, at that time the Blessed One was sitting in imperturbable concentration [either in the fourth jhāna, the dimension of the infinitude of space, or the dimension of the infinitude of consciousness].
ud3.3:11.4 | S: Then those mendicants thought, | T: The thought occurred to the monks,
ud3.3:11.5 | S: “What kind of meditation is the Buddha practicing right now?” | T: “Now, in which mental dwelling is the Blessed One now residing?”
ud3.3:11.6 | S: They thought, | T: Then they realized,
ud3.3:11.7 | S: “He is practicing the imperturbable meditation.” | T: “He is residing in the imperturbable dwelling.”
ud3.3:11.8 | S: They all sat in imperturbable meditation. | T: So they all sat in imperturbable concentration.
ud3.3:12.1 | S: And then, as the night was getting late, in the first watch of the night, Venerable Ānanda rose from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his cupped palms toward the Buddha and said, | T: Then Ven. Ānanda–when the night was far advanced, at the end of the first watch–got up from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, stood facing the Blessed One, paying homage with his hands placed palm-to-palm over his heart, and said to him,
ud3.3:12.2 | S: “Sir, the night is getting late. It is the first watch of the night, and the visiting mendicants have been sitting long. | T: “The night, lord, is far advanced. The first watch has ended. The visiting monks have been sitting here a long time.
ud3.3:12.3 | S: Sir, please greet the visiting mendicants.” | T: May the Blessed One greet them.”
ud3.3:12.4 | S: But the Buddha kept silent. | T: When this was said, the Blessed One remained silent.
ud3.3:13.1 | S: For a second time, as the night was getting late, in the middle watch of the night, Ānanda rose from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his cupped palms toward the Buddha and said, | T: Then a second time, when the night was far advanced, at the end of the middle watch, Ven. Ānanda got up from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, stood facing the Blessed One, paying homage to him with his hands placed palm-to-palm over his heart, and said to him, “The night, lord, is far advanced. The middle watch has ended.
ud3.3:13.2 | S: “Sir, the night is getting late. It is the second watch of the night, and the visiting mendicants have been sitting long. | T: The visiting monks have been sitting here a long time.
ud3.3:13.5 | S: Sir, please greet the visiting mendicants.” | T: May the Blessed One greet them.”
ud3.3:13.6 | S: But for a second time the Buddha kept silent. | T: When this was said, the Blessed One remained silent.
ud3.3:14.1 | S: For a third time, as the night was getting late, in the last watch of the night, as dawn stirred, bringing joy to the night, Ānanda rose from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his cupped palms toward the Buddha and said, | T: Then a third time, when the night was far advanced, at the end of the last watch, as dawn was approaching and the face of the night was beaming, Ven. Ānanda got up from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, stood facing the Blessed One, paying homage to him with his hands placed palm-to-palm over his heart, and said to him,
ud3.3:14.2 | S: “Sir, the night is getting late. It is the last watch of the night; dawn stirs, bringing joy to the night, and the visiting mendicants have been sitting long. | T: “The night, lord, is far advanced. The last watch has ended. Dawn is approaching and the face of the night is beaming. The visiting monks have been sitting here a long time.
ud3.3:14.7 | S: Sir, please greet the visiting mendicants.” | T: May the Blessed One greet them.”
ud3.3:15.1 | S: Then the Buddha emerged from that immersion and addressed Ānanda, | T: Then the Blessed One, emerging from his imperturbable concentration, said to Ven. Ānanda,
ud3.3:15.2 | S: “If you’d known, Ānanda, you wouldn’t have said so much. | T: “Ānanda, if you had known, not even that much would have occurred to you (to say).
ud3.3:15.3 | S: Both I and these five hundred mendicants have been sitting in imperturbable meditation.” | T: I, along with all 500 of these monks, have been sitting in imperturbable concentration.”
ud3.3:16.1 | S: Then, understanding this matter, on that occasion the Buddha expressed this heartfelt sentiment: | T: Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion exclaimed:
ud3.3:17.1 | S: “A mendicant who has beaten <j>the thorn of sensuality— | T: In whom they’re defeated– the thorn of sensuality,
ud3.3:17.2 | S: and abuse, killing, and caging— | T: insult, assault, & imprisonment:
ud3.3:17.3 | S: steady as a mountain, imperturbable, | T: Like a mountain standing unperturbed,
ud3.3:17.4 | S: trembles not at pleasure and pain.” | T: he doesn’t quiver from pleasures & pains : a monk.

## an7.72
an7.72:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: (none)
an7.72:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering among the Kosalans with a large Saṅgha of monks.
an7.72:1.3 | S: While walking along the road, at a certain spot he saw a great mass of fire burning, blazing, and glowing. | T: He saw, as he was going along the road in a certain district, a large mass of fire—aflame, blazing, aglow.
an7.72:1.4 | S: Seeing this he left the road, sat at the root of a tree on a seat spread out, | T: Seeing it, he went down from the road and sat down on a seat made ready at the root of a certain tree.
an7.72:1.5 | S: and addressed the mendicants: | T: Seated, he said to the monks,
an7.72:1.6 | S: “Mendicants, do you see that great mass of fire burning, blazing, and glowing?” | T: “Monks, do you see that large mass of fire—aflame, blazing, aglow?”
an7.72:1.7 | S: “Yes, sir.” | T: “Yes, lord.”
an7.72:2.1 | S: “What do you think, mendicants? | T: [1] “What do you think, monks:
an7.72:2.2 | S: Which is better—to sit or lie down embracing that great mass of fire? Or to sit or lie down embracing a girl of the aristocrats or brahmins or householders with soft and tender hands and feet?” | T: Which would be better? To sit or lie down hugging that great mass of fire—aflame, blazing, aglow—or to sit or lie down hugging a noble-warrior maiden or brahman maiden or householder maiden with soft & tender hands & feet?”
an7.72:2.3 | S: “Sir, it would be much better to sit or lie down embracing a girl of the aristocrats or brahmins or householders with soft and tender hands and feet. For it would be painful to sit or lie down embracing that great mass of fire.” | T: “Of course this would be better, lord: to sit or lie down hugging a noble-warrior maiden or brahman maiden or householder maiden with soft & tender hands & feet. It would simply be painful to sit or lie down hugging that great mass of fire—aflame, blazing, aglow.”
an7.72:3.1 | S: “I declare this to you, mendicants, I announce this to you! It would be better for that unethical man—of bad qualities, filthy, with suspicious behavior, underhand, no true ascetic or spiritual practitioner, though claiming to be one, rotten inside, festering, and depraved—to sit or lie down embracing that great mass of fire. | T: “I inform you, monks. I warn you, monks: For someone who is unprincipled, of evil character—unclean and suspect in his dealings, hidden in his actions, not a contemplative though claiming to be one, not leading the holy life though claiming to do so, inwardly rotten, oozing with desire, filthy by nature—it would be better to sit or lie down hugging that great mass of fire—aflame, blazing, aglow.
an7.72:3.2 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
an7.72:3.3 | S: Because that might result in death or deadly pain. But when his body breaks up, after death, it would not cause him to be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: For that reason he would undergo death or death-like pain, but he would not on that account, at the breakup of the body, after death, fall into a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.
an7.72:4.1 | S: But when such an unethical man sits or lies down embracing a girl of the aristocrats or brahmins or householders with soft and tender hands and feet, that brings him lasting harm and suffering. When his body breaks up, after death, he’s reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: But if someone who is unprincipled, of evil character… filthy by nature were to sit or lie down hugging a noble-warrior maiden or brahman maiden or householder maiden with soft & tender hands & feet, it would be for his long-term harm & pain. At the breakup of the body, after death, he would fall into a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.
an7.72:5.1 | S: What do you think, mendicants? | T: [2] “What do you think, monks:
an7.72:5.2 | S: Which is better—to have a strong man twist a strong horse-hair rope around both shins and tighten it so that it cuts through your outer skin, your inner skin, your flesh, sinews, and bones, until it reaches your marrow and keeps pressing? Or to consent to well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders bowing down to you?” | T: Which would be better? For a strong man, having wrapped a rough horse-hair rope around both your shins, to tighten it so that it would cut through the skin; having cut through the skin, it would cut through the inner skin; having cut through the inner skin, it would cut through the flesh; having cut through the flesh,
an7.72:5.3 | S: “Sir, it would be much better to consent to well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders bowing down. For it would be painful to have a strong man twist a strong horse-hair rope around your shins and tighten it so that it cut through the outer skin until it reached the marrow and kept pressing.” | T: it would cut through the tendons; having cut through the tendons, it would cut through the bone; having cut through the bone, it would destroy the marrow—or for you to consent to the homage paid by affluent noble warriors, affluent brahmans, or affluent householders?” “Of course this would be better, lord: to consent to the homage paid by affluent noble warriors, affluent brahmans, or affluent householders. It would simply be painful for a strong man, having wrapped a rough horse-hair rope around both our shins, to tighten it so that it would cut through the skin; having cut through the skin, it would cut through the inner skin; having cut through the inner skin, it would cut through the flesh; having cut through the flesh, it would cut through the tendons; having cut through the tendons, it would cut through the bone; having cut through the bone, it would destroy the marrow.” “I inform you, monks. I warn you, monks: For someone who is unprincipled, of evil character—unclean and suspect in his dealings, hidden in his actions, not a contemplative though claiming to be one, not leading the holy life though claiming to do so, inwardly rotten, oozing with desire, filthy by nature—it would be better for a strong man, having wrapped a rough horse-hair rope around both his shins, to tighten it so that it would cut through the skin; having cut through the skin, it would cut through the inner skin; having cut through the inner skin, it would cut through the flesh; having cut through the flesh, it would cut through the tendons; having cut through the tendons, it would cut through the bone; having cut through the bone,
an7.72:6.1 | S: “I declare this to you, mendicants, I announce this to you! It would be better for that unethical man to have a strong man twist a strong horse-hair rope around both shins and tighten it until it reached the marrow and kept pressing. | T: it would destroy the marrow.
an7.72:6.2 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
an7.72:6.3 | S: Because that might result in death or deadly pain. But when his body breaks up, after death, it would not cause him to be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: For that reason he would undergo death or death-like pain, but he would not on that account, at the breakup of the body, after death, fall into a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.
an7.72:6.4 | S: But when such an unethical man consents to well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders bowing down, that brings him lasting harm and suffering. When his body breaks up, after death, he’s reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: But if someone who is unprincipled, of evil character… filthy by nature were to consent to the homage paid by affluent noble warriors, affluent brahmans, or affluent householders, it would be for his long-term harm & pain. At the breakup of the body, after death, he would fall into a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.
an7.72:7.1 | S: What do you think, mendicants? | T: [3] “What do you think, monks:
an7.72:7.2 | S: Which is better—to have a strong man stab you in the chest with a sharp, oiled sword? Or to consent to well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders revering you with cupped palms?” | T: Which would be better? For a strong man to stab you in the chest with a sharp spear smeared with oil, or for you to consent to the reverential greetings of affluent noble warriors, affluent brahmans, or affluent householders?”
an7.72:7.3 | S: “Sir, it would be much better to consent to well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders revering you with cupped palms. For it would be painful to have a strong man stab you in the chest with a sharp, oiled sword.” | T: “Of course this would be better, lord: to consent to the reverential greetings of affluent noble warriors, affluent brahmans, or affluent householders. It would simply be painful for a strong man to stab us in the chest with a sharp spear smeared with oil.”
an7.72:8.1 | S: “I declare this to you, mendicants, I announce this to you! It would be better for that unethical man to have a strong man stab him in the chest with a sharp, oiled sword. | T: “I inform you, monks. I warn you, monks: For someone who is unprincipled, of evil character—unclean and suspect in his dealings, hidden in his actions, not a contemplative though claiming to be one, not leading the holy life though claiming to do so, inwardly rotten, oozing with desire, filthy by nature—it would be better for a strong man to stab him in the chest with a sharp speared smeared with oil.
an7.72:8.2 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
an7.72:8.3 | S: Because that might result in death or deadly pain. But when his body breaks up, after death, it would not cause him to be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: For that reason he would undergo death or death-like pain, but he would not on that account, at the breakup of the body, after death, fall into a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.
an7.72:8.4 | S: But when such an unethical man consents to well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders revering him with cupped palms, that brings him lasting harm and suffering. When his body breaks up, after death, he’s reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: But if someone who is unprincipled, of evil character… filthy by nature were to consent to the reverential greetings of affluent noble warriors, affluent brahmans, or affluent householders, it would be for his long-term harm & pain. At the breakup of the body, after death, he would fall into a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.
an7.72:9.1 | S: What do you think, mendicants? | T: [4] “What do you think, monks:
an7.72:9.2 | S: Which is better—to have a strong man wrap you up in a red-hot sheet of iron, burning, blazing, and glowing? Or to enjoy the use of a robe given in faith by well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders?” | T: Which would be better? For a strong man to wrap your body in a hot iron sheet—aflame, blazing, aglow—or for you to use a robe given out of conviction by affluent noble warriors, affluent brahmans, or affluent householders?”
an7.72:9.3 | S: “Sir, it would be much better to enjoy the use of a robe given in faith by well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders. | T: “Of course this would be better, lord: to use a robe given out of conviction by affluent noble warriors, affluent brahmans, or affluent householders.
an7.72:9.4 | S: For it would be painful to have a strong man wrap you up in a red-hot sheet of iron, burning, blazing, and glowing.” | T: It would simply be painful for a strong man to wrap our body in a hot iron sheet—aflame, blazing, aglow.”
an7.72:10.1 | S: “I declare this to you, mendicants, I announce this to you! It would be better for that unethical man to have a strong man wrap him up in a red-hot sheet of iron, burning, blazing, and glowing. | T: “I inform you, monks. I warn you, monks: For someone who is unprincipled, of evil character—unclean and suspect in his dealings, hidden in his actions, not a contemplative though claiming to be one, not leading the holy life though claiming to do so, inwardly rotten, oozing with desire, filthy by nature—it would be better for a strong man to wrap his body in a hot iron sheet—aflame, blazing, aglow.
an7.72:10.2 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
an7.72:10.3 | S: Because that might result in death or deadly pain. But when his body breaks up, after death, it would not cause him to be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: For that reason he would undergo death or death-like pain, but he would not on that account, at the breakup of the body, after death, fall into a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.
an7.72:10.4 | S: But when such an unethical man enjoys the use of a robe given in faith by well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders, that brings him lasting harm and suffering. When his body breaks up, after death, he’s reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: But if someone who is unprincipled, of evil character… filthy by nature were to use a robe given out of conviction by affluent noble warriors, affluent brahmans, or affluent householders, it would be for his long-term harm & pain. At the breakup of the body, after death, he would fall into a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.
an7.72:11.1 | S: What do you think, mendicants? | T: [5] “What do you think, monks:
an7.72:11.2 | S: Which is better—to have a strong man force your mouth open with a hot iron spike and shove in a red-hot copper ball, burning, blazing, and glowing, that burns your lips, mouth, tongue, throat, and stomach before coming out below dragging your entrails? Or to enjoy almsfood given in faith by well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders?” | T: Which would be better? For a strong man, having forced open your mouth with an iron stake—aflame, blazing, aglow—to stick in a hot copper ball—aflame, blazing, aglow—that would burn your lips, burn your tongue, burn your throat, burn your chest, and come out below, dragging along your small & large intestines—or for you to eat the alms food given out of conviction by affluent noble warriors, affluent brahmans, or affluent householders?”
an7.72:11.3 | S: “Sir, it would be much better to enjoy almsfood given in faith by well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders. For it would be painful to have a strong man force your mouth open with a hot iron spike and shove in a red-hot copper ball, burning, blazing, and glowing, that burns your lips, mouth, tongue, throat, and stomach before coming out below dragging your entrails.” | T: “Of course this would be better, lord: to eat the alms food given out of conviction by affluent noble warriors, affluent brahmans, or affluent householders. It would simply be painful for a strong man, having forced open our mouth with an iron stake—aflame, blazing, aglow—to stick in a hot copper ball—aflame, blazing, aglow—that would burn our lips, burn our tongue, burn our throat, burn our chest, and come out below, dragging along our small & large intestines.”
an7.72:12.1 | S: “I declare this to you, mendicants, I announce this to you! It would be better for that unethical man to have a strong man force his mouth open with a hot iron spike and shove in a red-hot copper ball, burning, blazing, and glowing, that burns his lips, mouth, tongue, throat, and stomach before coming out below with his entrails. | T: “I inform you, monks. I warn you, monks: For someone who is unprincipled, of evil character—unclean and suspect in his dealings, hidden in his actions, not a contemplative though claiming to be one, not leading the holy life though claiming to do so, inwardly rotten, oozing with desire, filthy by nature—it would be better for a strong man, having forced open his mouth with an iron stake—aflame, blazing, aglow—to stick in a hot copper ball—aflame, blazing, aglow—that would burn his lips, burn his tongue, burn his throat, burn his chest, and come out below, dragging along his small & large intestines.
an7.72:12.2 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
an7.72:12.3 | S: Because that might result in death or deadly pain. But when his body breaks up, after death, it would not cause him to be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: For that reason he would undergo death or death-like pain, but he would not on that account, at the breakup of the body, after death, fall into a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.
an7.72:12.4 | S: But when such an unethical man enjoys almsfood given in faith by well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders, that brings him lasting harm and suffering. When his body breaks up, after death, he’s reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: But if someone who is unprincipled, of evil character… filthy by nature were to eat the alms food given out of conviction by affluent noble warriors, affluent brahmans, or affluent householders, it would be for his long-term harm & pain. At the breakup of the body, after death, he would fall into a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.
an7.72:13.1 | S: What do you think, mendicants? | T: [6] “What do you think, monks:
an7.72:13.2 | S: Which is better—to have a strong man grab you by the head or shoulders and make you sit or lie down on red-hot iron bed or seat? Or to enjoy the use of beds and chairs given in faith by well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders?” | T: Which would be better? For a strong man, having seized you by the head or shoulders, to force you to sit or lie down on a hot iron chair or iron bed—aflame, blazing, aglow—or for you to use a chair or bed given out of conviction by affluent noble warriors, affluent brahmans, or affluent householders?”
an7.72:13.3 | S: “Sir, it would be much better to enjoy the use of beds and chairs given in faith by well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders. For it would be painful to have a strong man grab you by the head or shoulders and make you sit or lie down on a red-hot iron bed or seat.” | T: “Of course this would be better, lord: to use a chair or bed given out of conviction by affluent noble warriors, affluent brahmans, or affluent householders. It would simply be painful for a strong man, having seized us by the head or shoulders, to force us to sit or lie down on a hot iron chair or iron bed—aflame, blazing, aglow.”
an7.72:14.1 | S: “I declare this to you, mendicants, I announce this to you! It would be better for that unethical man to have a strong man grab him by the head or shoulders and make him sit or lie down on a red-hot iron bed or seat. | T: “I inform you, monks. I warn you, monks: For someone who is unprincipled, of evil character—unclean and suspect in his dealings, hidden in his actions, not a contemplative though claiming to be one, not leading the holy life though claiming to do so, inwardly rotten, oozing with desire, filthy by nature—it would be better for a strong man, having seized him by the head or shoulders, to force him to sit or lie down on a hot iron chair or iron bed—aflame, blazing, aglow.
an7.72:14.2 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
an7.72:14.3 | S: Because that might result in death or deadly pain. But when his body breaks up, after death, it would not cause him to be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: For that reason he would undergo death or death-like pain, but he would not on that account, at the breakup of the body, after death, fall into a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.
an7.72:14.4 | S: But when such an unethical man enjoys the use of beds and seats given in faith by well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders, that brings him lasting harm and suffering. When his body breaks up, after death, he’s reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: But if someone who is unprincipled, of evil character… filthy by nature were to use a chair or bed given out of conviction by affluent noble warriors, affluent brahmans, or affluent householders, it would be for his long-term harm & pain. At the breakup of the body, after death, he would fall into a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.
an7.72:15.1 | S: What do you think, mendicants? | T: [7] “What do you think, monks:
an7.72:15.2 | S: Which is better—to have a strong man grab you, turn you upside down, and shove you in a red-hot copper pot, burning, blazing, and glowing, where you’re seared in boiling scum, and swept up and down and round and round. Or to enjoy the use of dwellings given in faith by well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders?” | T: Which would be better? For a strong man, having seized you and turned you upside down, to throw you in a hot copper cauldron—aflame, blazing, aglow—where, boiling in a heap of froth, you would sometimes sink, sometimes rise, sometimes go side-to-side, or for you to use a dwelling given out of conviction by affluent noble warriors, affluent brahmans, or affluent householders?”
an7.72:15.3 | S: “Sir, it would be much better to enjoy the use of dwellings given in faith by well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders. For it would be painful to have a strong man grab you, turn you upside down, and shove you in a red-hot copper pot, burning, blazing, and glowing, where you’re seared in boiling scum, and swept up and down and round and round.” | T: “Of course this would be better, lord: to use a dwelling given out of conviction by affluent noble warriors, affluent brahmans, or affluent householders. It would simply be painful for a strong man, having seized us and turned us upside down, to throw us in a hot copper cauldron—aflame, blazing, aglow—where, boiling in a heap of froth, we would sometimes sink, sometimes rise, sometimes go side-to-side.”
an7.72:16.1 | S: “I declare this to you, mendicants, I announce this to you! It would be better for that unethical man to have a strong man grab him, turn him upside down, and shove him in a red-hot copper pot, burning, blazing, and glowing, where he’s seared in boiling scum, and swept up and down and round and round. | T: “I inform you, monks. I warn you, monks: For someone who is unprincipled, of evil character—unclean and suspect in his dealings, hidden in his actions, not a contemplative though claiming to be one, not leading the holy life though claiming to do so, inwardly rotten, oozing with desire, filthy by nature—it would be better for a strong man, having seized him and turned him upside down, to throw him in a hot copper cauldron—aflame, blazing, aglow—where, boiling in a heap of froth, he would sometimes sink, sometimes rise, sometimes go side-to-side.
an7.72:16.2 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
an7.72:16.3 | S: Because that might result in death or deadly pain. But when his body breaks up, after death, it would not cause him to be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: For that reason he would undergo death or death-like pain, but he would not on that account, at the breakup of the body, after death, fall into a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.
an7.72:16.4 | S: But when such an unethical man enjoys the use of dwellings given in faith by well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders, that brings him lasting harm and suffering. When his body breaks up, after death, he’s reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: But if someone who is unprincipled, of evil character—unclean and suspect in his dealings, hidden in his actions, not a contemplative though claiming to be one, not leading the holy life though claiming to do so, inwardly rotten, oozing with desire, filthy by nature—were to use a dwelling given out of conviction by affluent noble warriors, affluent brahmans, or affluent householders, it would be for his long-term harm & pain. At the breakup of the body, after death, he would fall into a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.
an7.72:17.1 | S: So you should train like this: | T: “Therefore, monks, you should train yourselves:
an7.72:17.2 | S: ‘The services of those whose robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick we enjoy shall be very fruitful and beneficial for them. And our going forth will not be barren, but will be fruitful and fertile.’ | T: ‘The services of those whose robes, alms-food, lodging, & medicinal requisites for curing the sick that we use will bring them great fruit & great reward; and our going forth will not be barren, but fruitful & fertile.’
an7.72:17.3 | S: That’s how you should train. | T: That’s how you should train yourselves.
an7.72:17.4 | S: Considering what is good for yourself, mendicants, is quite enough for you to persist with diligence. | T: For one who envisions his own good, it’s enough to achieve consummation through heedfulness.
an7.72:17.5 | S: Considering what is good for others is quite enough for you to persist with diligence. | T: For one who envisions the good of others, it’s enough to reach consummation through heedfulness.
an7.72:17.6 | S: Considering what is good for both is quite enough for you to persist with diligence.” | T: For one who envisions the good of both, it’s enough to reach consummation through heedfulness.”
an7.72:18.1 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: That is what the Blessed One said.
an7.72:18.2 | S: And while this discourse was being spoken, sixty monks spewed hot blood from their mouths. | T: And while this explanation was being given, approximately sixty monks vomited hot blood,
an7.72:18.3 | S: Sixty mendicants resigned the training and returned to a lesser life, saying: | T: approximately sixty monks renounced the training and returned to the lower life [saying,]
an7.72:18.4 | S: “It’s too hard, Blessed One! It’s just too hard!” | T: “It’s so hard to do, Blessed One, so very hard to do,”
an7.72:18.5 | S: And sixty monks were freed from defilements by not grasping. | T: while the minds of approximately sixty monks, through lack of clinging/sustenance, were released from effluents.

## sn55.25
sn55.25:1.1 | S: At Kapilavatthu. | T: At Kapilavatthu.
sn55.25:1.2 | S: Now at that time Sarakāni the Sakyan had passed away. | T: Now, on that occasion Sarakāni the Sakyan had died and was declared by the Blessed One to be a stream-winner,
sn55.25:1.3 | S: The Buddha declared that he was | T: (none)
sn55.25:1.4 | S: a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, assured, destined for awakening. | T: never again destined for the lower realms, certain, headed for self-awakening.
sn55.25:1.5 | S: At that, several Sakyans came together complaining, grumbling, and objecting, | T: Then a number of Sakyans, having met & assembled, were indignant, annoyed, & complained,
sn55.25:1.6 | S: “Oh lord, how incredible, how amazing! | T: “Isn’t it amazing, good sirs! Isn’t it astounding!
sn55.25:1.7 | S: Who can’t become a stream-enterer these days? | T: Now who here won’t be a stream-winner,
sn55.25:1.8 | S: For the Buddha even declared Sarakāni to be a stream-enterer after he passed away. | T: in as much as Sarakāni the Sakyan, having died, has been declared by the Blessed One to be a stream-winner, never again destined for the lower realms, certain,
sn55.25:1.9 | P: So bhagavatā byākato: | T: headed for self-awakening?
sn55.25:1.11 | S: Sarakāni didn’t fulfill the training.” | T: Sarakāni the Sakyan was one who was incomplete in doing the training!”
sn55.25:1.12 | S: Then Mahānāma the Sakyan went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. The Buddha said: | T: Then Mahānāma the Sakyan went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down, sat to one side. As he was sitting there, he said to the Blessed One,
sn55.25:2.1 | P: “Idha, bhante, saraṇāni sakko kālaṅkato. | T: “Just now, lord, when Sarakāni the Sakyan had died,
sn55.25:2.2 | P: So bhagavatā byākato: | T: he was declared by the Blessed One to be a stream-winner,
sn55.25:2.3 | P: ‘sotāpanno avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo’ti. | T: never again destined for the lower realms, certain, headed for self-awakening.
sn55.25:2.4 | P: Tatra sudaṁ, bhante, sambahulā sakkā saṅgamma samāgamma ujjhāyanti khīyanti vipācenti: | T: Then a number of Sakyans, having met & assembled, were indignant, annoyed, & complained,
sn55.25:2.5 | P: ‘acchariyaṁ vata bho, abbhutaṁ vata bho. | T: ‘Isn’t it amazing, good sirs! Isn’t it astounding!
sn55.25:2.6 | P: Ettha dāni ko na sotāpanno bhavissati. | T: Now who here won’t be a stream-winner,
sn55.25:2.7 | P: Yatra hi nāma saraṇāni sakko kālaṅkato. | T: in as much as Sarakāni the Sakyan, having died,
sn55.25:2.8 | P: So bhagavatā byākato— | T: has been declared by the Blessed One to be a stream-winner,
sn55.25:2.9 | P: sotāpanno avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇoti. | T: never again destined for the lower realms, certain, headed for self-awakening?
sn55.25:2.10 | P: Saraṇāni sakko sikkhāya aparipūrakārī ahosī’”ti. | T: Sarakāni the Sakyan was one who was incomplete in doing the training!’”
sn55.25:3.1 | S: “Mahānāma, when a lay follower has for a long time gone for refuge to the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, how could they go to the underworld? | T: “Mahānāma, any lay follower who has, for a long time, gone for refuge in the Awakened One, gone for refuge in the Dhamma, gone for refuge in the Saṅgha: How could he or she go to the lower realms?
sn55.25:3.2 | S: And if anyone should rightly be said to | T: For if one speaking rightly were to say of anyone,
sn55.25:3.3 | S: have for a long time gone for refuge to the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, it’s Sarakāni the Sakyan. | T: ‘He was a lay follower who had, for a long time, gone for refuge in the Awakened One, gone for refuge in the Dhamma, gone for refuge in the Saṅgha,’ it would be of Sarakāni the Sakyan that, speaking rightly, one would say that.
sn55.25:3.4 | S: Sarakāni the Sakyan has for a long time gone for refuge to the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha. | T: Sarakāni the Sakyan was a lay follower who had, for a long time, gone for refuge in the Buddha, gone for refuge in the Dhamma, gone for refuge in the Saṅgha. How could he go to the lower realms?
sn55.25:4.1 | S: Take a certain individual who is sure and devoted to the Buddha … | T: “There is the case, Mahānāma, where a certain individual is absolutely devoted to and fully confident in the Awakened One:
sn55.25:4.2 | P: itipi so bhagavā …pe… satthā devamanussānaṁ buddho bhagavāti. | T: ‘Indeed, the Blessed One is worthy & rightly self-awakened, consummate in clear-knowing & conduct, well-gone, an expert with regard to the cosmos, unexcelled trainer of people fit to be tamed, teacher of devas & human beings, awakened, blessed.’
sn55.25:4.3 | S: the teaching … | T: “He is absolutely devoted to and fully confident in the Dhamma: ‘The Dhamma is well taught by the Blessed One, to be seen here & now, timeless, inviting verification, pertinent, to be experienced by the observant for themselves.’
sn55.25:4.4 | S: the Saṅgha … | T: “He is absolutely devoted to and fully confident in the Saṅgha: ‘The Saṅgha of the Blessed One’s disciples who have practiced well… who have practiced straight-forwardly… who have practiced methodically… who have practiced masterfully—in other words, the four types of noble disciples when taken as pairs, the eight when taken as individual types—they are the Saṅgha of the Blessed One’s disciples: worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of respect, the incomparable field of merit for the world.’
sn55.25:4.5 | S: They have laughing wisdom and swift wisdom, and are endowed with freedom. | T: “He is one of joyous discernment, swift discernment, and endowed with release.
sn55.25:4.6 | S: They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom. And they live having realized it with their own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements. | T: With the ending of effluents, he dwells in the effluent-free awareness-release & discernment-release, having directly known & realized them for himself right in the here-&-now.
sn55.25:4.7 | S: This individual is exempt from hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. They’re exempt from places of loss, bad places, the underworld. | T: This individual, Mahānāma, is totally freed from hell, totally freed from the animal womb, totally freed from the state of the hungry ghosts, totally freed from planes of deprivation, the bad destinations, & the lower realms.
sn55.25:5.1 | S: Take another individual who is sure and devoted to the Buddha … | T: “There is the case, Mahānāma, where a certain individual is absolutely devoted to and fully confident in the Awakened One…
sn55.25:5.3 | S: the teaching … | T: the Dhamma…
sn55.25:5.4 | S: the Saṅgha … | T: the Saṅgha…
sn55.25:5.5 | S: They have laughing wisdom and swift wisdom, but are not endowed with freedom. | T: “He is one of joyous discernment, swift discernment, but not endowed with release.
sn55.25:5.6 | S: With the ending of the five lower fetters, they’re extinguished between one life and the next … they’re extinguished upon landing … they’re extinguished without extra effort … they’re extinguished with extra effort … they head upstream, going to the Akaniṭṭha realm. | T: With the ending of the five lower fetters, he is one unbound in between or one unbound on arrival (in a Pure Abode) or one unbound without fabrication (of exertion) or one unbound with fabrication (of exertion) or one going upstream to the Peerless [the Akaniṭṭha heaven, the highest of the Pure Abodes].
sn55.25:5.7 | S: This individual, too, is exempt from hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. They’re exempt from places of loss, bad places, the underworld. | T: This individual, too, is totally freed from hell, totally freed from the animal womb, totally freed from the state of the hungry ghosts, totally freed from planes of deprivation, the bad destinations, & the lower realms.
sn55.25:6.1 | S: Take another individual who is sure and devoted to the Buddha … | T: “There is the case, Mahānāma, where a certain individual is absolutely devoted to and fully confident in the Awakened One…
sn55.25:6.3 | S: the teaching … | T: the Dhamma…
sn55.25:6.4 | S: the Saṅgha … | T: the Saṅgha…
sn55.25:6.5 | S: But they don’t have laughing wisdom or swift wisdom, nor are they endowed with freedom. | T: “He is not one of joyous discernment, swift discernment, and is not endowed with release.
sn55.25:6.6 | S: With the ending of three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, they’re a once-returner. They come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering. | T: With the ending of (the first) three fetters, and with the attenuation of passion, aversion, & delusion, he is a once-returner who—on returning only once more to this world—will put an end to stress.
sn55.25:6.7 | S: This individual, too, is exempt from hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. They’re exempt from places of loss, bad places, the underworld. | T: This individual, too, is totally freed from hell, totally freed from the animal womb, totally freed from the state of the hungry ghosts, totally freed from planes of deprivation, the bad destinations, & the lower realms.
sn55.25:7.1 | S: Take another individual who is sure and devoted to the Buddha … | T: “There is the case, Mahānāma, where a certain individual is absolutely devoted to and fully confident in the Awakened One…
sn55.25:7.3 | S: the teaching … | T: the Dhamma…
sn55.25:7.4 | S: the Saṅgha … | T: the Saṅgha…
sn55.25:7.5 | S: But they don’t have laughing wisdom or swift wisdom, nor are they endowed with freedom. | T: “He is not one of joyous discernment, swift discernment, and is not endowed with release.
sn55.25:7.6 | S: With the ending of three fetters they’re a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, assured, destined for awakening. | T: With the ending of (the first) three fetters, he is a stream-winner, never again destined for the lower realms, certain, headed for self-awakening.
sn55.25:7.7 | S: This individual, too, is exempt from hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. They’re exempt from places of loss, bad places, the underworld. | T: This individual, too, is totally freed from hell, totally freed from the animal womb, totally freed from the state of the hungry ghosts, totally freed from planes of deprivation, the bad destinations, & the lower realms.
sn55.25:8.1 | S: Take another individual who isn’t sure or devoted to the Buddha … | T: “There is the case, Mahānāma, where a certain individual is not absolutely devoted to or fully confident in the Awakened One…
sn55.25:8.2 | S: the teaching … | T: the Dhamma…
sn55.25:8.3 | S: the Saṅgha … | T: the Saṅgha…
sn55.25:8.4 | S: They don’t have laughing wisdom or swift wisdom, nor are they endowed with freedom. | T: “He is not one of joyous discernment, swift discernment, and is not endowed with release.
sn55.25:8.5 | S: Still, they have these qualities: | T: But he has these qualities:
sn55.25:8.6 | S: the faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. | T: the faculty of conviction, the faculty of persistence, the faculty of mindfulness, the faculty of concentration, the faculty of discernment.
sn55.25:8.7 | S: And they accept the teachings proclaimed by the Realized One after deliberating them with a degree of wisdom. | T: He has accepted the dhammas proclaimed by the Tathāgata after scrutinizing them with a measure of discernment.
sn55.25:8.8 | S: This individual, too, doesn’t go to hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. They don’t go to places of loss, bad places, the underworld. | T: This individual, Mahānāma, is one who does not go to hell, does not go to the animal womb, does not go to the state of the hungry ghosts, does not go to planes of deprivation, the bad destinations, & the lower realms.
sn55.25:9.1 | S: Take another individual who isn’t sure or devoted to the Buddha … | T: “There is the case, Mahānāma, where a certain individual is not absolutely devoted to or fully confident in the Awakened One…
sn55.25:9.2 | S: the teaching … | T: the Dhamma…
sn55.25:9.3 | S: the Saṅgha … | T: the Saṅgha…
sn55.25:9.4 | S: They don’t have laughing wisdom or swift wisdom, nor are they endowed with freedom. | T: “He is not one of joyous discernment, swift discernment, and is not endowed with release.
sn55.25:9.5 | S: Still, they have these qualities: | T: But he has these qualities:
sn55.25:9.6 | S: the faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. | T: the faculty of conviction, the faculty of persistence, the faculty of mindfulness, the faculty of concentration, the faculty of discernment.
sn55.25:9.7 | S: And they have a degree of faith and love for the Buddha. | T: He has a measure of conviction in and a measure of love for the Tathāgata.
sn55.25:9.8 | S: This individual, too, doesn’t go to hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. They don’t go to places of loss, bad places, the underworld. | T: This individual, Mahānāma, is one who does not go to hell, does not go to the animal womb, does not go to the state of the hungry ghosts, does not go to planes of deprivation, the bad destinations, & the lower realms.
sn55.25:10.1 | S: Suppose there was a barren field, a barren ground, with uncleared stumps. And you had seeds that were broken, spoiled, weather-damaged, infertile, and ill kept. And the heavens didn’t provide enough rain. | T: “Suppose, Mahānama, that there were a poor field with poor soil and with stumps not removed, with seeds that were broken, rotten, damaged by wind & sun, infertile, not well planted; and the sky would not send rain at the right time.
sn55.25:10.2 | S: Would those seeds grow, increase, and mature?” | T: Would those seeds exhibit growth, increase, & proliferation?”
sn55.25:10.3 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “No, lord.”
sn55.25:10.4 | S: “In the same way, take a teaching that’s badly explained and badly propounded, not emancipating, not leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha. | T: “In the same way, Mahānāma, there is the case where a Dhamma is poorly proclaimed, poorly expounded, not leading out, not conducive to calming, expounded by one who is not rightly self-awakened.
sn55.25:10.5 | S: This is what I call a barren field. | T: That, I tell you, is like the poor field.
sn55.25:10.6 | S: A disciple remains in such a teaching, practicing in line with that teaching, practicing it properly, living in line with that teaching. | T: And there a disciple dwells practicing the Dhamma in accordance with [that] Dhamma, practicing masterfully, living in line with [that] Dhamma.
sn55.25:10.7 | S: This is what I call a bad seed. | T: That, I tell you, is like the poor seed.
sn55.25:11.1 | S: Suppose there was a fertile field, a fertile ground, well-cleared of stumps. And you had seeds that were intact, unspoiled, not weather-damaged, fertile, and well-kept. And there’s plenty of rainfall. | T: “Now, suppose, Mahānama, that there were a good field with good soil and with stumps well removed, with seeds that were not broken, not rotten, not damaged by wind & sun, fertile, well planted;
sn55.25:11.2 | P: devo ca sammā dhāraṁ anuppaveccheyya. | T: and the sky would send rain at the right time.
sn55.25:11.3 | S: Would those seeds grow, increase, and mature?” | T: Would those seeds exhibit growth, increase, & proliferation?”
sn55.25:11.4 | S: “Yes, sir.” | T: “Yes, lord.”
sn55.25:11.5 | S: “In the same way, take a teaching that’s well explained and well propounded, emancipating, leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is a fully awakened Buddha. | T: “In the same way, Mahānāma, there is the case where a Dhamma is well-proclaimed, well-expounded, leading out, conducive to calming, expounded by one who is rightly self-awakened.
sn55.25:11.6 | S: This is what I call a fertile field. | T: That, I tell you, is like the good field.
sn55.25:11.7 | S: A disciple remains in such a teaching, practicing in line with that teaching, practicing it properly, living in line with that teaching. | T: And there a disciple dwells practicing the Dhamma in accordance with the Dhamma, practicing masterfully, living in line with the Dhamma.
sn55.25:11.8 | S: This is what I call a good seed. | T: That, I tell you, is like the good seed.
sn55.25:11.9 | S: Why can’t this apply to Sarakāni? | T: “And how much more, then, Sarakāni the Sakyan?
sn55.25:11.10 | S: Mahānāma, Sarakāni the Sakyan fulfilled the training at the time of his death.” | T: Sarakāni the Sakyan, at the time of death, was one who was complete in doing of the training.”

