## ud8.6, continued
ud8.6:17.7 | S: Middling rulers or royal chief ministers inclined to build houses at sites possessed by middling deities. | T: In the area where devas of middling influence occupy sites, there the minds of the king’s royal ministers of middling influence are inclined to build their homes.
ud8.6:17.8 | S: Lesser rulers or royal chief ministers inclined to build houses at sites possessed by lesser deities. | T: In the area where devas of low influence occupy sites, there the minds of the king’s royal ministers of low influence are inclined to build their homes.
ud8.6:17.9 | S: As far as the civilized region extends, as far as the trading zone extends, this will be the chief city: the Pāṭaliputta trade center. | T: “Ānanda, as far as the sphere of the Ariyans extends, as far as merchants’ roads extend, this will be the supreme city: Pāṭaliputta, where the seedpods of the Pāṭali plant break open.
ud8.6:17.10 | S: But Pāṭaliputta will face three threats: | T: There will be three dangers for Pāṭaliputta:
ud8.6:17.11 | S: from fire, flood, and dissension.” | T: from fire, from water, and from the breaking of alliances.”
ud8.6:18.1 | S: Then the Magadhan ministers Sunidha and Vassakāra approached the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. | T: Then Sunīdha & Vassakāra, the chief ministers of Magadha, went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, exchanged courteous greetings with him.
ud8.6:18.2 | S: When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they stood to one side and said, | T: After an exchange of friendly greetings & courtesies, they stood to one side.
ud8.6:18.3 | P: Ekamantaṁ ṭhitā kho sunidhavassakārā magadhamahāmattā bhagavantaṁ etadavocuṁ: | T: As they were standing there, they said to him,
ud8.6:18.4 | S: “Would Worthy Gotama together with the mendicant Saṅgha please accept today’s meal from me?” | T: “May Master Gotama acquiesce to our meal today, together with the community of monks.”
ud8.6:19.1 | S: Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, they went to their own guest house, where they had delicious fresh and cooked foods prepared. Then they had the Buddha informed of the time, saying, | T: The Blessed One acquiesced with silence. Then Sunīdha & Vassakāra, the chief ministers of Magadha, understanding the Blessed One’s acquiescence, went to their rest-house. On arrival, after having exquisite staple & non-staple food prepared in their rest-house, they announced the time to the Blessed One:
ud8.6:19.2 | S: “It’s time, worthy Gotama, the meal is ready.” | T: “It’s time, Master Gotama. The meal is ready.”
ud8.6:20.1 | S: Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, went to their guest house together with the mendicant Saṅgha, where he sat down on the seat spread out. | T: Then the Blessed One, early in the morning, adjusted his under robe and–carrying his bowl & robes–went together with the community of monks to the rest-house of Sunīdha & Vassakāra, the chief ministers of Magadha. On arrival, he sat down on the seat laid out.
ud8.6:20.2 | S: Then Sunidha and Vassakāra served and satisfied the mendicant Saṅgha headed by the Buddha with their own hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods. | T: Sunīdha & Vassakāra, with their own hands, served & satisfied the community of monks, with the Buddha at its head, with exquisite staple & non-staple food.
ud8.6:21.1 | S: When the Buddha had eaten and washed his hand and bowl, Sunidha and Vassakāra took a low seat and sat to one side. | T: Then, when the Blessed One had finished his meal and rinsed his bowl & hands, Sunīdha & Vassakāra, taking a low seat, sat to one side. As they were sitting there,
ud8.6:21.2 | S: The Buddha expressed his appreciation with these verses: | T: the Blessed One gave his approval with these verses:
ud8.6:22.1 | S: “In the place he makes his dwelling, | T: In whatever place a wise person makes his dwelling,
ud8.6:22.2 | S: having fed the astute | T: –there providing food
ud8.6:22.3 | S: and the virtuous here, | T: for the virtuous,
ud8.6:22.4 | S: the restrained spiritual practitioners, | T: the restrained, leaders of the holy life–
ud8.6:23.1 | S: he should dedicate an offering | T: he should dedicate that offering
ud8.6:23.2 | S: to the deities there. | T: to the devas there.
ud8.6:23.3 | S: Venerated, they venerate him; | T: (none)
ud8.6:23.4 | S: honored, they honor him. | T: They, receiving honor, will honor him; being respected, will show him respect.
ud8.6:24.1 | S: After that they have sympathy for him, | T: As a result, they will feel sympathy for him,
ud8.6:24.2 | S: like a mother for the child at her breast. | T: like that of a mother for her child, her son.
ud8.6:24.3 | S: A man beloved of the deities | T: A person with whom the devas sympathize
ud8.6:24.4 | S: always sees nice things.” | T: always meets with auspicious things.
ud8.6:25.1 | S: When the Buddha had expressed his appreciation to Sunidha and Vassakāra with these verses, he rose from his seat and left. | T: Then the Blessed One, having given his approval to Sunīdha & Vassakāra with these verses, got up from his seat and left.
ud8.6:26.1 | S: Sunidha and Vassakāra followed behind the Buddha, thinking, | T: And on that occasion, Sunīdha & Vassakāra followed right after the Blessed One, (thinking,)
ud8.6:26.2 | S: “The gate through which the ascetic Gotama exits today shall be named the Gotama Gate. | T: “By whichever gate Gotama the contemplative departs today, that will be called the Gotama Gate.
ud8.6:26.3 | S: The ford at which he crosses the Ganges River shall be named the Gotama Ford.” | T: And by whichever ford he crosses over the Ganges River, that will be called the Gotama Ford.”
ud8.6:27.1 | S: Then the gate through which the Buddha exited was named the Gotama Gate. | T: So the gate by which the Blessed One departed was called the Gotama Gate.
ud8.6:27.2 | S: Then the Buddha came to the Ganges River. | T: Then he went to the Ganges River.
ud8.6:27.3 | S: Now at that time the Ganges was full to the brim so a crow could drink from it. | T: Now on that occasion the Ganges River was full up to the banks, so that a crow could drink from it.
ud8.6:27.4 | S: Wanting to cross from the near to the far shore, some people were seeking a boat, some a dinghy, while some were tying up a raft. | T: Some people were searching for boats, some were searching for floats, some were binding rafts in hopes of going from this shore to the other.
ud8.6:27.5 | S: But, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, the Buddha, together with the mendicant Saṅgha, vanished from the near shore and landed on the far shore. | T: So the Blessed One–just as a strong man might extend his flexed arm or flex his extended arm–disappeared from the near bank of the Ganges River and reappeared on the far bank together with the community of monks.
ud8.6:28.1 | S: He saw all those humans wanting to cross over. | T: He saw that some people were searching for boats, some were searching for floats, some were binding rafts in hopes of going from this shore to the other.
ud8.6:29.1 | S: Then, understanding this matter, on that occasion the Buddha expressed this heartfelt sentiment: | T: Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion exclaimed:
ud8.6:30.1 | S: “Those who cross a deluge or stream | T: Those who cross the foaming flood,
ud8.6:30.2 | S: have built a bridge and left the marshes behind. | T: having made a bridge, avoiding the swamps
ud8.6:30.3 | S: While some people are still tying a raft, | T: –while people are binding rafts–
ud8.6:30.4 | S: intelligent people have crossed over.” | T: have already crossed : the wise.

## mn53
mn53:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying among the Sakyans at Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Park.
mn53:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. | T: (none)
mn53:2.1 | S: Now at that time a new town hall had recently been constructed for the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu. It had not yet been occupied by an ascetic or brahmin or any human at all. | T: Now at that time a new reception hall had just been built by the Kapilavatthu Sakyans, and it had not yet been dwelled in by any contemplative, brahman, or anyone at all in human form.
mn53:2.2 | S: Then the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: | T: So the Kapilavatthu Sakyans went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As they were sitting there they said to him,
mn53:2.3 | S: “Sir, a new town hall has recently been constructed for the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu. It has not yet been occupied by an ascetic or brahmin or any human at all. | T: “Lord, a new reception hall has just been built by the Kapilavatthu Sakyans, and it has not yet been dwelled in by any contemplative, brahman, or anyone at all in human form.
mn53:2.4 | S: May the Buddha be the first to use it, and only then will the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu use it. | T: May the Blessed One be the first to use it. When the Blessed One has used it first, the Kapilavatthu Sakyans will use it afterwards.
mn53:2.5 | S: That would be for the lasting welfare and happiness of the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu.” | T: That will be for their long-term welfare & happiness.”
mn53:3.1 | S: The Buddha consented with silence. | T: The Blessed One acquiesced with silence.
mn53:3.2 | S: Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, the Sakyans got up from their seat, bowed and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on their right. Then they went to the new town hall, where they spread carpets all over, prepared seats, set up a water jar, and placed an oil lamp. Then they went back to the Buddha, | T: Sensing his acquiescence, the Kapilavatthu Sakyans got up from their seats, bowed down to him, circumambulated him, and then went to the new reception hall. On arrival, they spread it all over with felt rugs, arranged seats, set out a water vessel, and raised an oil lamp. Then they went to the Blessed One and, on arrival,
mn53:3.3 | S: bowed, stood to one side, | T: having bowed down to him, stood to one side. As they were standing there they said to him, “Lord, the reception hall has been covered all over with felt rugs, seats have been arranged, a water vessel has been set out, and an oil lamp raised.
mn53:3.4 | S: and told him of their preparations, saying, | T: (none)
mn53:3.6 | S: “Please, sir, come at your convenience.” | T: It is now time for the Blessed One to do as he sees fit.”
mn53:4.1 | S: Then the Buddha robed up and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the new town hall together with the Saṅgha of mendicants. Having washed his feet, he entered the town hall and sat against the central column facing east. | T: So the Blessed One—after adjusting his lower robe and taking his bowl & outer robe—went together with a Saṅgha of monks to the reception hall. On arrival he washed his feet, entered the hall, and sat with his back to the central post, facing east.
mn53:4.2 | S: The Saṅgha of mendicants also washed their feet, entered the town hall, and sat against the west wall facing east, with the Buddha right in front of them. | T: The Saṅgha of monks washed their feet, entered the hall, and sat with their backs to the western wall, facing east, ranged around the Blessed One.
mn53:4.3 | S: The Sakyans of Kapilavatthu also washed their feet, entered the town hall, and sat against the east wall facing west, with the Buddha right in front of them. | T: The Kapilavatthu Sakyans washed their feet, entered the hall, and sat with their backs to the eastern wall, facing west, ranged around the Blessed One.
mn53:5.1 | S: The Buddha spent much of the night educating, encouraging, firing up, and inspiring the Sakyans with a Dhamma talk. Then he addressed Venerable Ānanda, | T: Then the Blessed One—having spent most of the night instructing, urging, rousing, & encouraging the Kapilavatthu Sakyans with a Dhamma talk—said to Ven. Ānanda,
mn53:5.2 | S: “Ānanda, speak about the practicing trainee to the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu as you feel inspired. | T: “Ānanda, speak to the Kapilavatthu Sakyans about the person who follows the practice for one in training.
mn53:5.3 | S: My back is sore, | T: My back aches.
mn53:5.4 | S: I’ll stretch it.” | T: I will rest it.”
mn53:5.5 | S: “Yes, sir,” Ānanda replied. | T: Ven. Ānanda responded, “As you say, lord.”
mn53:5.6 | S: And then the Buddha spread out his outer robe folded in four and laid down in the lion’s posture—on the right side, placing one foot on top of the other—mindful and aware, and focused on the time of getting up. | T: Then the Blessed One, having arranged his outer robe folded in four, lay down on his right side in the lion’s sleeping posture, with one foot on top of the other, mindful & alert, having made a mental note to get up.
mn53:6.1 | S: Then Ānanda addressed Mahānāma the Sakyan: | T: Then Ven. Ānanda addressed Mahānāma the Sakyan:
mn53:6.2 | S: “Mahānāma, a noble disciple is accomplished in ethics, guards the sense doors, eats in moderation, and is dedicated to wakefulness. They have seven good qualities, and they get the four absorptions—blissful meditations in this life that belong to the higher mind—when they want, without trouble or difficulty. | T: “There is the case, Mahānāma, where a disciple of the noble ones is consummate in virtue, guards the doors to his sense faculties, knows moderation in eating, is devoted to wakefulness, is endowed with seven qualities, and obtains at will—without trouble or difficulty—the four jhānas that constitute heightened awareness and a pleasant abiding in the here & now.
mn53:7.1 | S: And how is a noble disciple accomplished in ethics? | T: “And how is the disciple of the noble ones consummate in virtue?
mn53:7.2 | S: It’s when a noble disciple is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. | T: There is the case where the disciple of the noble ones is virtuous. He dwells restrained in accordance with the Pāṭimokkha, consummate in his behavior & sphere of activity. He trains himself, having undertaken the training rules, seeing danger in the slightest faults.
mn53:7.3 | S: That’s how a noble disciple is ethical. | T: This is how the disciple of the noble ones is consummate in virtue.
mn53:8.1 | S: And how does a noble disciple guard the sense doors? | T: “And how does the disciple of the noble ones guard the doors to his sense faculties?
mn53:8.2 | S: When a noble disciple sees a sight with their eyes, they don’t get caught up in the features and details. | T: There is the case where the disciple of the noble ones, on seeing a form with the eye, doesn’t grasp at any theme or variations by which—
mn53:8.3 | S: If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint. | T: if he were to dwell without restraint over the faculty of the eye—evil, unskillful qualities such as greed or distress might assail him. He practices with restraint. He guards the faculty of the eye. He achieves restraint with regard to the faculty of the eye.
mn53:8.4 | S: When they hear a sound with their ears … | T: “On hearing a sound with the ear.…
mn53:8.5 | S: When they smell an odor with their nose … | T: “On smelling an aroma with the nose.…
mn53:8.6 | S: When they taste a flavor with their tongue … | T: “On tasting a flavor with the tongue.…
mn53:8.7 | S: When they feel a touch with their body … | T: “On feeling a tactile sensation with the body.…
mn53:8.8 | S: When they know an idea with their mind, they don’t get caught up in the features and details. | T: “On cognizing an idea with the intellect, he doesn’t grasp at any theme or variations by which—
mn53:8.9 | S: If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. | T: if he were to dwell without restraint over the faculty of the intellect—evil, unskillful qualities such as greed or distress might assail him. He practices with restraint. He guards the faculty of the intellect. He achieves restraint with regard to the faculty of the intellect.
mn53:8.10 | S: That’s how a noble disciple guards the sense doors. | T: This is how the disciple of the noble ones guards the doors to his sense faculties.
mn53:9.1 | S: And how does a noble disciple eat in moderation? | T: “And how does the disciple of the noble ones know moderation in eating?
mn53:9.2 | S: It’s when a noble disciple reflects rationally on the food that they eat: | T: There is the case where the disciple of the noble ones, considering it appropriately, takes his food not playfully,
mn53:9.3 | S: ‘Not for fun, indulgence, adornment, or decoration, but only to sustain this body, to avoid harm, and to support spiritual practice. In this way, I shall put an end to old discomfort and not give rise to new discomfort, and I will have the means to keep going, blamelessness, and a comfortable abiding.’ | T: nor for intoxication, nor for putting on bulk, nor for beautification, but simply for the survival & continuance of this body, for ending its afflictions, for the support of the holy life, thinking, ‘I will destroy old feelings (of hunger) & not create new feelings (from overeating). Thus I will maintain myself, be blameless, & live in comfort.’
mn53:9.4 | S: That’s how a noble disciple eats in moderation. | T: This is how the disciple of the noble ones knows moderation in eating.
mn53:10.1 | S: And how is a noble disciple dedicated to wakefulness? | T: “And how is the disciple of the noble ones devoted to wakefulness?
mn53:10.2 | S: It’s when a noble disciple practices walking and sitting meditation by day, purifying their mind from obstacles. | T: There is the case where a monk during the day, sitting & pacing back & forth, cleanses his mind of any qualities that would hold the mind in check. During the first watch of the night [dusk to 10 p.m.], sitting & pacing back & forth, he cleanses his mind of any qualities that would hold the mind in check.
mn53:10.3 | S: In the first watch of the night, they continue to practice walking and sitting meditation. | T: During the second watch of the night [10 p.m.
mn53:10.4 | S: In the middle watch, they lie down in the lion’s posture—on the right side, placing one foot on top of the other—mindful and aware, and focused on the time of getting up. | T: to 2 a.m.], reclining on his right side, he takes up the lion’s posture, one foot placed on top of the other, mindful, alert, with his mind set on getting up [either as soon as he awakens or at a particular time].
mn53:10.5 | S: In the last watch, they get up and continue to practice walking and sitting meditation, purifying their mind from obstacles. | T: During the last watch of the night [2 a.m. to dawn], sitting & pacing back & forth, he cleanses his mind of any qualities that would hold the mind in check.
mn53:10.6 | S: That’s how a noble disciple is dedicated to wakefulness. | T: This is how the monk is devoted to wakefulness.
mn53:11.1 | S: And how does a noble disciple have seven good qualities? | T: “And how is the disciple of the noble ones endowed with seven qualities?
mn53:11.2 | S: It’s when a noble disciple has faith in the Realized One’s awakening: | T: “[1] There is the case where the disciple of the noble ones has conviction, is convinced of the Tathāgata’s awakening:
mn53:11.3 | S: ‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ | T: ‘Indeed, the Blessed One is worthy & rightly self-awakened, consummate in clear-knowing & conduct, well-gone, an expert with regard to the cosmos, unexcelled trainer of people fit to be tamed, teacher of devas & human beings, awakened, blessed.’
mn53:12.1 | S: They have a conscience. They’re conscientious about bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and conscientious about having any bad, unskillful qualities. | T: “[2] He feels shame at (the thought of engaging in) bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, mental misconduct.
mn53:13.1 | S: They exercise prudence. They’re prudent when it comes to bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and prudent when it comes to acquiring any bad, unskillful qualities. | T: “[3] He feels compunction over (the suffering that would result from) bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, mental misconduct.
mn53:14.1 | S: They’re very learned, remembering and keeping what they’ve learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and penetrating them theoretically. | T: “[4] He has heard much, has retained what he has heard, has stored what he has heard. Whatever teachings are admirable in the beginning, admirable in the middle, admirable in the end, that—in their meaning & expression—proclaim the holy life that is entirely complete & pure: those he has listened to often, retained, discussed, accumulated, examined with his mind, and well-penetrated in terms of his views.
mn53:15.1 | S: They live with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They’re strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities. | T: “[5] He keeps his persistence aroused for abandoning unskillful qualities and taking on skillful qualities. He is steadfast, solid in his effort, not shirking his duties with regard to skillful qualities.
mn53:16.1 | S: They’re mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and alertness, and can remember and recall what was said and done long ago. | T: “[6] He is mindful, highly meticulous, remembering & able to call to mind even things that were done & said long ago.
mn53:17.1 | S: They’re wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. | T: “[7] He is discerning, endowed with discernment of arising & passing away—noble, penetrating, leading to the right ending of stress.
mn53:17.2 | S: That’s how a noble disciple has seven good qualities. | T: “This is how the disciple of the noble ones is endowed with seven qualities.
mn53:18.1 | S: And how does a noble disciple get the four absorptions—blissful meditations in this life that belong to the higher mind—when they want, without trouble or difficulty? | T: “And how does the disciple of the noble ones obtain at will—without trouble or difficulty—the four jhānas that constitute heightened awareness and a pleasant abiding in the here & now?
mn53:18.2 | S: It’s when a noble disciple, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption … | T: There is the case where, quite secluded from sensuality, secluded from unskillful qualities, the disciple of the noble ones enters & remains in the first jhāna: rapture & pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by directed thought & evaluation.
mn53:18.3 | S: second absorption … | T: With the stilling of directed thoughts & evaluations, he enters & remains in the second jhāna: rapture & pleasure born of concentration, unification of awareness free from directed thought & evaluation—internal assurance.
mn53:18.4 | S: third absorption … | T: With the fading of rapture he remains equanimous, mindful, & alert, and senses pleasure with the body. He enters & remains in the third jhāna, of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous & mindful, he has a pleasant abiding.’
mn53:18.5 | S: fourth absorption. | T: With the abandoning of pleasure & pain—as with the earlier disappearance of elation & distress—he enters & remains in the fourth jhāna: purity of equanimity & mindfulness, neither pleasure nor pain.
mn53:18.6 | S: That’s how a noble disciple gets the four absorptions—blissful meditations in this life that belong to the higher mind—when they want, without trouble or difficulty. | T: This is how the disciple of the noble ones obtains at will—without trouble or difficulty—the four jhānas that constitute heightened awareness and a pleasant abiding in the here & now.
mn53:19.1 | S: When a noble disciple is accomplished in ethics, guards the sense doors, eats in moderation, and is dedicated to wakefulness; and they have seven good qualities, and they get the four absorptions—blissful meditations in this life that belong to the higher mind—when they want, without trouble or difficulty, they are called a noble disciple who is a practicing trainee. Their eggs are unspoiled, and they are capable of breaking out of their shell, becoming awakened, and achieving the supreme sanctuary from the yoke. | T: “Now, when a disciple of the noble ones is consummate in virtue in this way, guards the doors to his sense faculties in this way, knows moderation in eating in this way, is devoted to wakefulness in this way, is endowed with seven qualities in this way, and obtains at will—without trouble or difficulty—the four jhānas that constitute heightened awareness and a pleasant abiding in the here & now in this way, then he is called a disciple of the noble ones who follows the practice for one in training, whose eggs are unspoiled, who is capable of breaking out, capable of awakening, capable of attaining the supreme rest from the yoke.
mn53:19.2 | S: Suppose there was a chicken with eight or ten or twelve eggs. And she properly sat on them to keep them warm and incubated. Even if that chicken doesn’t wish, | T: “Just as if a hen had eight, ten, or twelve eggs that she covered rightly, warmed rightly, & incubated rightly: Even though this wish did not occur to her—
mn53:19.3 | S: ‘If only my chicks could break out of the eggshell with their claws and beak and hatch safely!’ | T: ‘O that my chicks might break through the egg shells with their spiked claws or beaks and hatch out safely!’—
mn53:19.4 | S: Still they can break out and hatch safely. | T: still it is possible that the chicks would break through the shells with their spiked claws or beaks and hatch out safely.
mn53:19.5 | S: In the same way, when a noble disciple is practicing all these things they are called a noble disciple who is a practicing trainee. Their eggs are unspoiled, and they are capable of breaking out of their shell, becoming awakened, and achieving the supreme sanctuary from the yoke. | T: In the same way, when a disciple of the noble ones is consummate in virtue in this way, guards the doors to his sense faculties in this way, knows moderation in eating in this way, is devoted to wakefulness in this way, is endowed with seven qualities in this way, and obtains at will—without trouble or difficulty—the four jhānas that constitute heightened awareness and a pleasant abiding in the here & now in this way, then he is called a disciple of the noble ones who follows the practice for one in training, whose eggs are unspoiled, who is capable of breaking out, capable of awakening, capable of attaining the supreme rest from the yoke.
mn53:20.1 | S: Relying on this supreme purity of mindfulness and equanimity, that noble disciple recollects their many kinds of past lives. | T: “Now when the disciple of the noble ones has arrived at this purity of equanimity & mindfulness, he recollects his manifold past lives,
mn53:20.2 | S: That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. … And so they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details. | T: i.e., one birth, two… five, ten… fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand, many eons of cosmic contraction, many eons of cosmic expansion, many eons of cosmic contraction & expansion: ‘There I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance. Such was my food, such my experience of pleasure & pain, such the end of my life. Passing away from that state, I re-arose there. There too I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance. Such was my food, such my experience of pleasure & pain, such the end of my life. Passing away from that state, I re-arose here.’ Thus he recollects his manifold past lives in their modes & details.
mn53:20.3 | S: This is their first breaking out, like a chick from an eggshell. | T: This is his first breaking out, like that of the hen’s chicks from their shells.
mn53:21.1 | S: Relying on this supreme purity of mindfulness and equanimity, that noble disciple, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. … They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. | T: “When the disciple of the noble ones has arrived at this purity of equanimity & mindfulness, he sees—by means of the divine eye, purified & surpassing the human—beings passing away & re-appearing, and he discerns how they are inferior & superior, beautiful & ugly, fortunate & unfortunate in accordance with their kamma: ‘These beings—who were endowed with bad conduct of body, speech & mind, who reviled noble ones, held wrong views and undertook actions under the influence of wrong views—with the break-up of the body, after death, have re-appeared in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell. But these beings—who were endowed with good conduct of body, speech, & mind, who did not revile noble ones, who held right views and undertook actions under the influence of right views—with the break-up of the body, after death, have re-appeared in a good destination, a heavenly world.’ Thus—by means of the divine eye, purified & surpassing the human—he sees beings passing away & re-appearing, and he discerns how they are inferior & superior, beautiful & ugly, fortunate & unfortunate in accordance with their kamma.
mn53:21.2 | S: This is their second breaking out, like a chick from an eggshell. | T: This is his second breaking out, like that of the hen’s chicks from their shells.
mn53:22.1 | S: Relying on this supreme purity of mindfulness and equanimity, that noble disciple realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom. And they live having realized it with their own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements. | T: “When the disciple of the noble ones has arrived at this purity of equanimity & mindfulness, he enters & remains in the effluent-free awareness-release & discernment-release, having directly known & realized them for himself right in the here & now.
mn53:22.2 | S: This is their third breaking out, like a chick from an eggshell. | T: This is his third breaking out, like that of the hen’s chicks from their shells.
mn53:23.1 | S: A noble disciple’s conduct includes the following: being accomplished in ethics, | T: “Now, when the disciple of the noble ones is consummate in virtue, that is a matter of his conduct.
mn53:23.2 | S: guarding the sense doors, | T: When he guards the doors to his sense faculties…
mn53:23.3 | S: moderation in eating, | T: knows moderation in eating…
mn53:23.4 | S: being dedicated to wakefulness, | T: is devoted to wakefulness…
mn53:23.5 | S: having seven good qualities, | T: is endowed with seven qualities, that is a matter of his conduct.
mn53:23.6 | S: and getting the four absorptions when they want, without trouble or difficulty. | T: When he obtains at will—without trouble or difficulty—the four jhānas that constitute heightened awareness and a pleasant abiding in the here & now, that is a matter of his conduct.
mn53:24.1 | S: A noble disciple’s knowledge includes the following: recollecting their past lives, | T: “When he recollects his manifold past lives… in their modes & details,
mn53:24.2 | S: clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, | T: that is a matter of his clear-knowing. When he sees—by means of the divine eye, purified & surpassing the human—beings passing away & re-appearing.…
mn53:24.3 | S: and realizing the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, having realized it with their own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements. | T: When he enters & remains in the effluent-free awareness-release & discernment-release, having directly known & realized them for himself right in the here & now, that is a matter of his clear knowing.
mn53:25.1 | S: This noble disciple is said to be ‘accomplished in knowledge’, and also ‘accomplished in conduct’, and also ‘accomplished in knowledge and conduct’. | T: “This, Mahānāma, is called a disciple of the noble ones who is consummate in clear-knowing, consummate in conduct, consummate in clear-knowing & conduct.
mn53:25.2 | S: And the divinity Sanaṅkumāra also spoke this verse: | T: And by the Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra this verse was said:
mn53:25.3 | S: ‘The aristocrat is best among people | T: ‘The noble warrior is the best among people
mn53:25.4 | S: who take clan as the standard. | T: when judging by clan.
mn53:25.5 | S: But one accomplished in knowledge and conduct | T: But a person consummate in clear-knowing & conduct,
mn53:25.6 | S: is best among gods and humans.’ | T: is the best of beings human & divine.’
mn53:25.7 | S: And that verse was well sung by the Divinity Sanaṅkumāra, not poorly sung; well spoken, not poorly spoken, beneficial, not harmful, and it was approved by the Buddha.” | T: “This verse was well-sung by the Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra, not ill-sung; well-said, not ill-said; connected with the goal, not unconnected with the goal. It was endorsed by the Blessed One.”
mn53:26.1 | S: Then the Buddha got up and said to Venerable Ānanda, | T: Then the Blessed One got up and said to Ven. Ānanda,
mn53:26.2 | S: “Good, good, Ānanda! | T: “Good, good, Ānanda.
mn53:26.3 | S: It’s good that you spoke to the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu about the practicing trainee.” | T: What you have said to the Kapilavatthu Sakyans about the person who follows the practice for one in training is good.”
mn53:26.4 | S: That is what Venerable Ānanda said, | T: That is what Ven. Ānanda said,
mn53:26.5 | S: and the Teacher concurred. | T: and the Teacher approved.
mn53:26.6 | S: Satisfied, the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu approved what Venerable Ānanda said. | T: Gratified, the Kapilavatthu Sakyans delighted in Ven. Ānanda’s words.

## mn6
mn6:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: (none)
mn6:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. | T: I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.
mn6:1.3 | S: There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, | T: There he addressed the monks,
mn6:1.4 | S: “Mendicants!” | T: “Monks!”
mn6:1.5 | S: “Venerable sir,” they replied. | T: “Yes, lord,” the monks responded to him.
mn6:1.6 | S: The Buddha said this: | T: The Blessed One said:
mn6:2.1 | S: “Mendicants, live by the ethical precepts and the monastic code. Live restrained in the monastic code, conducting yourselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, keep the rules you’ve undertaken. | T: “Monks, dwell consummate in virtue, consummate in terms of the Pāṭimokkha. Dwell restrained in accordance with the Pāṭimokkha, consummate in your behavior & sphere of activity. Train yourselves, having undertaken the training rules, seeing danger in the slightest faults.
mn6:3.1 | S: A mendicant might wish: ‘May I be liked and approved by my spiritual companions, respected and admired.’ So let them fulfill their precepts, be committed to inner serenity of the heart, not neglect absorption, be endowed with discernment, and frequent empty huts. | T: “If a monk would wish, ‘May I be dear & pleasing to my companions in the holy life, respected by & inspiring to them,’ then he should be one who brings the precepts to perfection, who is committed to inner tranquility of awareness, who doesn’t neglect jhāna, who is endowed with insight, and who frequents empty dwellings.
mn6:4.1 | S: A mendicant might wish: ‘May I receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.’ So let them fulfill their precepts, be committed to inner serenity of the heart, not neglect absorption, be endowed with discernment, and frequent empty huts. | T: “If a monk would wish, ‘May I be someone who receives robes, alms food, lodgings, & medicinal requisites for curing the sick,’ then he should be one who brings the precepts to perfection, who is committed to inner tranquility of awareness, who doesn’t neglect jhāna, who is endowed with insight, and who frequents empty dwellings.
mn6:5.1 | S: A mendicant might wish: ‘May the services of those whose robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick I enjoy be very fruitful and beneficial for them.’ So let them fulfill their precepts … | T: “If a monk would wish, ‘Whatever I use or consume in terms of robes, alms food, lodgings, & medical requisites for curing the sick, may that be of great fruit, of great benefit to those who provided them,’ then he should be one who brings the precepts to perfection, who is committed to inner tranquility of awareness, who doesn’t neglect jhāna, who is endowed with insight, and who frequents empty dwellings.
mn6:6.1 | S: A mendicant might wish: ‘When deceased family and relatives who have passed away recollect me with a confident mind, may this be very fruitful and beneficial for them.’ So let them fulfill their precepts … | T: “If a monk would wish, ‘When my kinsmen & relatives who have died & passed away recollect me with brightened minds, may it be of great fruit, of great benefit,’ then he should be one who brings the precepts to perfection, who is committed to inner tranquility of awareness, who doesn’t neglect jhāna, who is endowed with insight, and who frequents empty dwellings.
mn6:7.1 | S: A mendicant might wish: ‘May I prevail over desire and discontent, and may desire and discontent not prevail over me. May I live having mastered desire and discontent whenever they arose.’ So let them fulfill their precepts … | T: “If a monk would wish, ‘May I overcome displeasure & delight, and not be overcome by displeasure & delight. May I dwell conquering again & again any displeasure & delight that has arisen,’ then he should be one who brings the precepts to perfection, who is committed to inner tranquility of awareness, who doesn’t neglect jhāna, who is endowed with insight, and who frequents empty dwellings.
mn6:8.1 | S: A mendicant might wish: ‘May I prevail over fear and dread, and may fear and dread not prevail over me. May I live having mastered fear and dread whenever they arose.’ So let them fulfill their precepts … | T: “If a monk would wish, ‘May I overcome fear & dread, and not be overcome by fear & dread. May I dwell conquering again & again any fear & dread that have arisen,’ then he should be one who brings the precepts to perfection, who is committed to inner tranquility of awareness, who doesn’t neglect jhāna, who is endowed with insight, and who frequents empty dwellings.
mn6:9.1 | S: A mendicant might wish: ‘May I get the four absorptions—blissful meditations in this life that belong to the higher mind—when I want, without trouble or difficulty.’ So let them fulfill their precepts … | T: “If a monk would wish, ‘May I attain—whenever I want, without strain, without difficulty—the four jhānas that are heightened mental states, pleasant abidings in the here & now,’ then he should be one who brings the precepts to perfection, who is committed to inner tranquility of awareness, who doesn’t neglect jhāna, who is endowed with insight, and who frequents empty dwellings.
mn6:10.1 | S: A mendicant might wish: ‘May I have direct meditative experience of the peaceful liberations that are formless, transcending form.’ So let them fulfill their precepts … | T: “If a monk would wish, ‘May I dwell touching with the body those liberations that are peaceful, formless, transcending forms,’ then he should be one who brings the precepts to perfection, who is committed to inner tranquility of awareness, who doesn’t neglect jhāna, who is endowed with insight, and who frequents empty dwellings.
mn6:11.1 | S: A mendicant might wish: ‘May I, with the ending of three fetters, become a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, assured, destined for awakening.’ So let them fulfill their precepts … | T: “If a monk would wish, ‘May I—with the ending of (the first) three fetters—be a stream-winner, certain, never again destined for the lower realms, headed for self-awakening,’ then he should be one who brings the precepts to perfection, who is committed to inner tranquility of awareness, who doesn’t neglect jhāna, who is endowed with insight, and who frequents empty dwellings.
mn6:12.1 | S: A mendicant might wish: ‘May I, with the ending of three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, become a once-returner, coming back to this world once only, then making an end of suffering.’ So let them fulfill their precepts … | T: “If a monk would wish, ‘May I—with the ending of (the first) three fetters, and with the attenuation of passion, aversion, & delusion—be a once-returner, who, on returning only once more to this world, would make an ending to stress,’ then he should be one who brings the precepts to perfection, who is committed to inner tranquility of awareness, who doesn’t neglect jhāna, who is endowed with insight, and who frequents empty dwellings.
mn6:13.1 | S: A mendicant might wish: ‘May I, with the ending of the five lower fetters, be reborn spontaneously and become extinguished there, not liable to return from that world.’ So let them fulfill their precepts … | T: “If a monk would wish, ‘May I—with the ending of the five lower fetters, be one who is due to arise spontaneously (in the Pure Abodes), there to be totally unbound, destined never again to return from that world,’ then he should be one who brings the precepts to perfection, who is committed to inner tranquility of awareness, who doesn’t neglect jhāna, who is endowed with insight, and who frequents empty dwellings.
mn6:14.1 | S: A mendicant might wish: ‘May I wield the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying myself and becoming one again; materializing and dematerializing; going unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful; controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity.’ So let them fulfill their precepts … | T: “If a monk would wish, ‘May I wield manifold supranormal powers. Having been one, may I become many; having been many, may I become one. May I appear & vanish. May I go unimpeded through walls, ramparts, & mountains as if through space. May I dive in & out of the earth as if it were water. May I walk on water without sinking as if it were dry land. Sitting cross-legged, may I fly through the air like a winged bird. With my hand may I touch & stroke even the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful. May I influence with my body even as far as the Brahmā worlds,’ then he should be one who brings the precepts to perfection, who is committed to inner tranquility of awareness, who doesn’t neglect jhāna, who is endowed with insight, and who frequents empty dwellings.
mn6:15.1 | S: A mendicant might wish: ‘With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, may I hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far.’ So let them fulfill their precepts … | T: “If a monk would wish, ‘May I hear—by means of the divine ear-element, purified and surpassing the human—both kinds of sounds: divine and human, whether near or far,’ then he should be one who brings the precepts to perfection, who is committed to inner tranquility of awareness, who doesn’t neglect jhāna, who is endowed with insight, and who frequents empty dwellings.
mn6:16.1 | S: A mendicant might wish: ‘May I understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having encompassed them with my mind. | T: “If a monk would wish, ‘May I know the awareness of other beings, other individuals, having encompassed it with my own awareness.
mn6:16.2 | S: May I understand mind with greed as “mind with greed”, | T: May I discern a mind with passion as “a mind with passion,”
mn6:16.3 | S: and mind without greed as “mind without greed”; | T: and a mind without passion as “a mind without passion.”
mn6:16.4 | S: mind with hate as “mind with hate”, | T: May I discern a mind with aversion as “a mind with aversion,”
mn6:16.5 | S: and mind without hate as “mind without hate”; | T: and a mind without aversion as “a mind without aversion.”
mn6:16.6 | S: mind with delusion as “mind with delusion”, | T: May I discern a mind with delusion as “a mind with delusion,”
mn6:16.7 | S: and mind without delusion as “mind without delusion”; | T: and a mind without delusion as “a mind without delusion.”
mn6:16.8 | S: constricted mind as “constricted mind”, | T: May I discern a restricted mind as “a restricted mind,”
mn6:16.9 | S: and scattered mind as “scattered mind”; | T: and a scattered mind as “a scattered mind.”
mn6:16.10 | S: expansive mind as “expansive mind”, | T: May I discern an enlarged mind as “an enlarged mind,”
mn6:16.11 | S: and unexpansive mind as “unexpansive mind”; | T: and an unenlarged mind as “an unenlarged mind.”
mn6:16.12 | S: mind that is not supreme as “mind that is not supreme”, | T: May I discern an excelled mind [one that is not at the most excellent level] as “an excelled mind,” and an unexcelled mind as
mn6:16.13 | S: and mind that is supreme as “mind that is supreme”; | T: “an unexcelled mind.”
mn6:16.14 | S: mind immersed in samādhi as “mind immersed in samādhi”, | T: May I discern a concentrated mind as “a concentrated mind,”
mn6:16.15 | S: and mind not immersed in samādhi as “mind not immersed in samādhi”; | T: and an unconcentrated mind as “an unconcentrated mind.”
mn6:16.16 | S: freed mind as “freed mind”, | T: May I discern a released mind as “a released mind,”
mn6:16.17 | S: and unfreed mind as “unfreed mind”.’ | T: and an unreleased mind as “an unreleased mind,”’
mn6:16.18 | S: So let them fulfill their precepts … | T: then he should be one who brings the precepts to perfection, who is committed to inner tranquility of awareness, who doesn’t neglect jhāna, who is endowed with insight, and who frequents empty dwellings.
mn6:17.1 | S: A mendicant might wish: ‘May I recollect many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. May I remember: “There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.” May I thus recollect my many kinds of past lives, with features and details.’ | T: “If a monk would wish, ‘May I recollect my manifold past lives, i.e., one birth, two births, three births, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, one hundred, one thousand, one hundred thousand, many eons of cosmic contraction, many eons of cosmic expansion, many eons of cosmic contraction & expansion, (recollecting,) ‘There I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance. Such was my food, such my experience of pleasure & pain, such the end of my life. Passing away from that state, I re-arose there. There too I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance. Such was my food, such my experience of pleasure & pain, such the end of my life. Passing away from that state, I re-arose here.’ Thus may I recollect my manifold past lives in their modes & details,’
mn6:17.2 | S: So let them fulfill their precepts … | T: then he should be one who brings the precepts to perfection, who is committed to inner tranquility of awareness, who doesn’t neglect jhāna, who is endowed with insight, and who frequents empty dwellings.
mn6:18.1 | S: A mendicant might wish: ‘With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, may I see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place—and understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds: “These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.” And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, may I see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. And may I understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds.’ | T: “If a monk would wish, ‘May I see—by means of the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human—beings passing away and re-appearing, and may I discern how they are inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate in accordance with their kamma: ‘These beings—who were endowed with bad conduct of body, speech, and mind, who reviled the noble ones, held wrong views and undertook actions under the influence of wrong views—with the break-up of the body, after death, have re-appeared in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell. But these beings—who were endowed with good conduct of body, speech, and mind, who did not revile the noble ones, who held right views and undertook actions under the influence of right views—with the break-up of the body, after death, have re-appeared in a good destination, a heavenly world.’ Thus—by means of the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human—may I see beings passing away and re-appearing, and may I discern how they are inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate in accordance with their kamma,’
mn6:18.2 | S: So let them fulfill their precepts … | T: then he should be one who brings the precepts to perfection, who is committed to inner tranquility of awareness, who doesn’t neglect jhāna, who is endowed with insight, and who frequents empty dwellings.
mn6:19.1 | S: A mendicant might wish: ‘May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, and live having realized it with my own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements.’ | T: “If a monk would wish, ‘May I—with the ending of effluents—remain in the effluent-free awareness-release & discernment-release, having directly known & realized them for myself right in the here & now,’
mn6:19.2 | S: So let them fulfill their precepts, be committed to inner serenity of the heart, not neglect absorption, be endowed with discernment, and frequent empty huts. | T: then he should be one who brings the precepts to perfection, who is committed to inner tranquility of awareness, who doesn’t neglect jhāna, who is endowed with insight, and who frequents empty dwellings.
mn6:20.1 | S: ‘Mendicants, live by the ethical precepts and the monastic code. Live restrained in the monastic code, conducting yourselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, keep the rules you’ve undertaken.’ | T: “‘Monks, dwell consummate in virtue, consummate in terms of the Pāṭimokkha. Dwell restrained in accordance with the Pāṭimokkha, consummate in your behavior & sphere of activity. Train yourselves, having undertaken the training rules, seeing danger in the slightest faults.’
mn6:20.2 | S: That’s what I said, and this is why I said it.” | T: Thus was it said. And in reference to this was it said.”
mn6:20.3 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: That is what the Blessed One said.
mn6:20.4 | S: Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said. | T: Gratified, the monks delighted in the Blessed One’s words.

