## mn39, continued
mn39:11.3 | S: Now, mendicants, you might think, | T: Now the thought may occur to you,
mn39:11.4 | S: ‘We have conscience and prudence, our bodily, verbal, and mental behavior is pure, our livelihood is pure, our sense doors are restrained, we don’t eat too much, we are dedicated to wakefulness, and we have mindfulness and situational awareness. | T: ‘We are endowed with shame & compunction. Our bodily conduct is pure. Our verbal conduct… our mental conduct is pure. Our livelihood is pure. We guard the doors to our sense faculties. We have a sense of moderation in eating. We are devoted to wakefulness. We are possessed of mindfulness & alertness.
mn39:11.5 | S: This is sufficient …’ | T: That much is enough, that much means we’re done, so that the goal of our contemplative state has been reached. There’s nothing further to be done,’ and you may rest content with just that.
mn39:11.6 | P: Ārocayāmi vo, bhikkhave, paṭivedayāmi vo, bhikkhave: | T: So I tell you, monks. I exhort you, monks.
mn39:11.7 | P: ‘mā vo, sāmaññatthikānaṁ sataṁ sāmaññattho parihāyi sati uttariṁ karaṇīye’. | T: Don’t let those of you who seek the contemplative state fall away from the goal of the contemplative state when there is more to be done.
mn39:12.1 | S: What more is there to do? | T: Abandoning the Hindrances “And what more is to be done?
mn39:12.2 | S: Take a mendicant who frequents a secluded lodging—a wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw. | T: There is the case where a monk seeks out a secluded dwelling: a forest, the shade of a tree, a mountain, a glen, a hillside cave, a charnel ground, a forest grove, the open air, a heap of straw.
mn39:13.1 | S: After the meal, they return from almsround, sit down cross-legged, set their body straight, and bring mindfulness to the present. | T: After his meal, returning from his alms round, he sits down, crosses his legs, holds his body erect, and brings mindfulness to the fore.
mn39:13.2 | S: Giving up covetousness for the world, they meditate with a heart rid of covetousness, cleansing the mind of covetousness. | T: “Abandoning covetousness with regard to the world, he dwells with an awareness devoid of covetousness. He cleanses his mind of covetousness.
mn39:13.3 | S: Giving up ill will and malevolence, they meditate with a mind rid of ill will, full of sympathy for all living beings, cleansing the mind of ill will. | T: Abandoning ill will and anger, he dwells with an awareness devoid of ill will, sympathetic with the welfare of all living beings. He cleanses his mind of ill will and anger.
mn39:13.4 | S: Giving up dullness and drowsiness, they meditate with a mind rid of dullness and drowsiness, perceiving light, mindful and aware, cleansing the mind of dullness and drowsiness. | T: Abandoning sloth and drowsiness, he dwells with an awareness devoid of sloth and drowsiness, mindful, alert, percipient of light. He cleanses his mind of sloth and drowsiness.
mn39:13.5 | S: Giving up restlessness and remorse, they meditate without restlessness, their mind settled internally, cleansing the mind of restlessness and remorse. | T: Abandoning restlessness and anxiety, he dwells undisturbed, his mind inwardly stilled. He cleanses his mind of restlessness and anxiety.
mn39:13.6 | S: Giving up doubt, they meditate having gone beyond doubt, not undecided about skillful qualities, cleansing the mind of doubt. | T: Abandoning uncertainty, he dwells having crossed over uncertainty, with no perplexity with regard to skillful qualities. He cleanses his mind of uncertainty.
mn39:14.1 | S: Suppose a man who has gotten into debt were to apply himself to work, | T: “Suppose that a man, taking a loan, invests it in his business affairs.
mn39:14.2 | S: and his efforts proved successful. | T: His business affairs succeed.
mn39:14.3 | S: He would pay off the original loan and have enough left over to support his partner. | T: He repays his old debts and there is extra left over for maintaining his wife.
mn39:14.4 | S: Thinking about this, | T: The thought would occur to him,
mn39:14.5 | P: ‘ahaṁ kho pubbe iṇaṁ ādāya kammante payojesiṁ, tassa me te kammantā samijjhiṁsu. | T: ‘Before, taking a loan, I invested it in my business affairs. Now my business affairs have succeeded.
mn39:14.6 | P: Sohaṁ yāni ca porāṇāni iṇamūlāni tāni ca byantī akāsiṁ, atthi ca me uttariṁ avasiṭṭhaṁ dārabharaṇāyā’ti. | T: I have repaid my old debts and there is extra left over for maintaining my wife.’
mn39:14.7 | S: he’d be filled with joy and happiness. | T: Because of that he would experience joy and happiness.
mn39:14.8 | S: Suppose a person was sick, suffering, gravely ill. They’d lose their appetite and get physically weak. | T: “Now suppose that a man falls sick—in pain and seriously ill. He does not enjoy his meals, and there is no strength in his body.
mn39:14.9 | S: But after some time they’d recover from that illness, and regain their appetite and their strength. | T: As time passes, he eventually recovers from that sickness. He enjoys his meals and there is strength in his body.
mn39:14.10 | S: Thinking about this, | T: The thought would occur to him,
mn39:14.11 | P: ‘ahaṁ kho pubbe ābādhiko ahosiṁ dukkhito bāḷhagilāno, bhattañca me nacchādesi, na ca me āsi kāye balamattā, somhi etarahi tamhā ābādhā mutto, bhattañca me chādeti, atthi ca me kāye balamattā’ti. | T: ‘Before, I was sick… Now I am recovered from that sickness. I enjoy my meals and there is strength in my body.’
mn39:14.12 | S: they’d be filled with joy and happiness. | T: Because of that he would experience joy and happiness.
mn39:14.13 | S: Suppose a person was imprisoned in a jail. | T: “Now suppose that a man is bound in prison.
mn39:14.14 | S: But after some time they were released from jail, safe and sound, with no loss of wealth. | T: As time passes, he eventually is released from that bondage, safe and sound, with no loss of property.
mn39:14.15 | S: Thinking about this, | T: The thought would occur to him,
mn39:14.16 | P: ‘ahaṁ kho pubbe bandhanāgāre baddho ahosiṁ, somhi etarahi tamhā bandhanā mutto, sotthinā abbhayena, natthi ca me kiñci bhogānaṁ vayo’ti. | T: ‘Before, I was bound in prison. Now I am released from that bondage, safe and sound, with no loss of my property.’
mn39:14.17 | S: they’d be filled with joy and happiness. | T: Because of that he would experience joy and happiness.
mn39:14.18 | S: Suppose a person was a bondservant. They would not be their own master, but indentured to another, unable to go where they wish. | T: “Now suppose that a man is a slave, subject to others, not subject to himself, unable to go where he likes.
mn39:14.19 | S: But after some time they’d be freed from servitude. They would be their own master, not indentured to another, a freeman able to go where they wish. | T: As time passes, he eventually is released from that slavery, subject to himself, not subject to others, freed, able to go where he likes.
mn39:14.20 | S: Thinking about this, | T: The thought would occur to him,
mn39:14.21 | P: ‘ahaṁ kho pubbe dāso ahosiṁ anattādhīno parādhīno na yenakāmaṅgamo, somhi etarahi tamhā dāsabyā mutto attādhīno aparādhīno bhujisso yenakāmaṅgamo’ti. | T: ‘Before, I was a slave… Now I am released from that slavery, subject to myself, not subject to others, freed, able to go where I like.’
mn39:14.22 | S: they’d be filled with joy and happiness. | T: Because of that he would experience joy and happiness.
mn39:14.23 | S: Suppose there was a person with wealth and property who was traveling along a desert road. | T: “Now suppose that a man, carrying money and goods, is traveling by a road through desolate country.
mn39:14.24 | S: But after some time they crossed over the desert, safe and sound, with no loss of wealth. | T: As time passes, he eventually emerges from that desolate country, safe and sound, with no loss of property.
mn39:14.25 | S: Thinking about this, | T: The thought would occur to him,
mn39:14.26 | P: ‘ahaṁ kho pubbe sadhano sabhogo kantāraddhānamaggaṁ paṭipajjiṁ. | T: ‘Before, carrying money and goods, I was traveling by a road through desolate country.
mn39:14.27 | P: Somhi etarahi tamhā kantārā nitthiṇṇo sotthinā abbhayena, natthi ca me kiñci bhogānaṁ vayo’ti. | T: Now I have emerged from that desolate country, safe and sound, with no loss of my property.’
mn39:14.28 | S: they’d be filled with joy and happiness. | T: Because of that he would experience joy and happiness.
mn39:14.29 | S: In the same way, as long as these five hindrances are not given up inside themselves, a mendicant regards them as a debt, a disease, a prison, slavery, and a desert crossing. | T: “In the same way, when these five hindrances are not abandoned in himself, the monk regards it as a debt, a sickness, a prison, slavery, a road through desolate country.
mn39:14.30 | S: But when these five hindrances are given up inside themselves, a mendicant regards this as freedom from debt, good health, release from prison, emancipation, and a place of sanctuary at last. | T: But when these five hindrances are abandoned in himself, he regards it as unindebtedness, good health, release from prison, freedom, a place of security.
mn39:15.1 | S: They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken wisdom. | T: When he sees that they have been abandoned within him, gladness is born. In one who is gladdened, rapture is born. Enraptured at heart, his body grows calm. His body calm, he is sensitive to pleasure. Feeling pleasure, his mind becomes concentrated.
mn39:15.2 | S: Then, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: The Four Jhānas “Quite secluded from sensuality, secluded from unskillful qualities, he enters and remains in the first jhāna: rapture & pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by directed thought and evaluation.
mn39:15.3 | S: They drench, steep, fill, and spread themselves with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. | T: He permeates and pervades, suffuses and fills this very body with the rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
mn39:15.4 | S: It’s like when a deft bathroom attendant or their apprentice pours bath powder into a bronze dish, sprinkling it little by little with water. They knead it until the ball of bath powder is soaked and saturated with moisture, spread through inside and out; yet no moisture oozes out. | T: Just as if a dexterous bathman or bathman’s apprentice would pour bath powder into a brass basin and knead it together, sprinkling it again and again with water, so that his ball of bath powder—saturated, moisture-laden, permeated within and without—would nevertheless not drip;
mn39:15.5 | S: In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads themselves with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. | T: even so, the monk permeates… this very body with the rapture & pleasure born of seclusion. There’s nothing of his entire body unpervaded by rapture & pleasure born of seclusion.
mn39:16.1 | S: Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: “Furthermore, with the stilling of directed thoughts & evaluations, he enters and remains in the second jhāna: rapture & pleasure born of concentration, unification of awareness free from directed thought and evaluation—internal assurance.
mn39:16.2 | S: They drench, steep, fill, and spread themselves with rapture and bliss born of immersion. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with rapture and bliss born of immersion. | T: He permeates and pervades, suffuses and fills this very body with the rapture & pleasure born of concentration.
mn39:16.3 | S: It’s like a deep lake fed by spring water. There’s no inlet to the east, west, north, or south, and the heavens would not properly bestow showers from time to time. But the stream of cool water welling up in the lake drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads throughout the lake. There’s no part of the lake that’s not spread through with cool water. | T: Just like a lake with spring-water welling up from within, having no inflow from the east, west, north, or south, and with the skies supplying abundant showers time and again, so that the cool fount of water welling up from within the lake would permeate and pervade, suffuse and fill it with cool waters, there being no part of the lake unpervaded by the cool waters;
mn39:16.4 | S: In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads themselves with rapture and bliss born of immersion. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with rapture and bliss born of immersion. | T: even so, the monk permeates… this very body with the rapture & pleasure born of concentration. There’s nothing of his entire body unpervaded by rapture & pleasure born of concentration.
mn39:17.1 | S: Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and remains in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, experiencing for themselves the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’ | T: “And furthermore, with the fading of rapture, he remains equanimous, mindful, & alert, and senses pleasure with the body. He enters and remains in the third jhāna, of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous & mindful, he has a pleasant abiding.’
mn39:17.2 | S: They drench, steep, fill, and spread themselves with bliss free of rapture. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with bliss free of rapture. | T: He permeates and pervades, suffuses and fills this very body with the pleasure divested of rapture.
mn39:17.3 | S: It’s like a pool with blue water lilies, or pink or white lotuses. Some of them sprout and grow in the water without rising above it, thriving underwater. From the tip to the root they’re drenched, steeped, filled, and soaked with cool water. There’s no part of them that’s not soaked with cool water. | T: Just as in a lotus pond, some of the lotuses, born and growing in the water, stay immersed in the water and flourish without standing up out of the water, so that they are permeated and pervaded, suffused and filled with cool water from their roots to their tips, and nothing of those lotuses would be unpervaded with cool water;
mn39:17.4 | S: In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads themselves with bliss free of rapture. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with bliss free of rapture. | T: even so, the monk permeates… this very body with the pleasure divested of rapture. There’s nothing of his entire body unpervaded with pleasure divested of rapture.
mn39:18.1 | S: Furthermore, with the giving up of pleasure and pain and the disappearance of former happiness and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. | T: “And furthermore, with the abandoning of pleasure & pain—as with the earlier disappearance of joy & distress—he enters and remains in the fourth jhāna: purity of equanimity & mindfulness, neither-pleasure nor stress.
mn39:18.2 | S: They sit spreading their body through with pure bright mind. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with pure bright mind. | T: He sits, permeating the body with a pure, bright awareness.
mn39:18.3 | S: It’s like someone sitting wrapped from head to foot with white cloth. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread over with white cloth. | T: Just as if a man were sitting covered from head to foot with a white cloth so that there would be no part of his body to which the white cloth did not extend;
mn39:18.4 | S: In the same way, they sit spreading their body through with pure bright mind. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with pure bright mind. | T: even so, the monk sits, permeating the body with a pure, bright awareness. There’s nothing of his entire body unpervaded by pure, bright awareness.
mn39:19.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward recollection of past lives. | T: The Three Knowledges “With his mind thus concentrated, purified, and bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to knowledge of the recollection of past lives [lit: previous homes].
mn39:19.2 | S: They recollect many kinds of past lives, with features and details. | T: He recollects his manifold past lives, i.e., one birth, two births, three births, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, one hundred, one thousand, one hundred thousand, many eons of cosmic contraction, many eons of cosmic expansion, many eons of cosmic contraction and expansion, (recollecting,) ‘There I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance. Such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such the end of my life. Passing away from that state, I re-arose there. There too I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance. Such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such the end of my life. Passing away from that state, I re-arose here.’ Thus he recollects his manifold past lives in their modes and details.
mn39:19.3 | S: Suppose a person was to leave their home village and go to another village. From that village they’d go to yet another village. And from that village they’d return to their home village. They’d think: ‘I went from my home village to another village. There I stood like this, sat like that, spoke like this, or kept silent like that. From that village I went to yet another village. There too I stood like this, sat like that, spoke like this, or kept silent like that. And from that village I returned to my home village.’ | T: “Just as if a man were to go from his home village to another village, and then from that village to yet another village, and then from that village back to his home village. The thought would occur to him, ‘I went from my home village to that village over there. There I stood in such a way, sat in such a way, talked in such a way, and remained silent in such a way. From that village I went to that village over there, and there I stood in such a way, sat in such a way, talked in such a way, and remained silent in such a way. From that village I came back home.’
mn39:19.4 | S: In the same way, a mendicant recollects their many kinds of past lives, with features and details. | T: In the same way—with his mind thus concentrated, purified, and bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, and attained to imperturbability—the monk directs and inclines it to knowledge of the recollection of past lives. He recollects his manifold past lives… in their modes and details.
mn39:20.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings. | T: “With his mind thus concentrated, purified, and bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to knowledge of the passing away and re-appearance of beings.
mn39:20.2 | S: With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. | T: He sees—by means of the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human—beings passing away and re-appearing, and he discerns how they are inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate in accordance with their kamma: ‘These beings—who were endowed with bad conduct of body, speech, and mind, who reviled the noble ones, held wrong views and undertook actions under the influence of wrong views—with the break-up of the body, after death, have re-appeared in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell. But these beings—who were endowed with good conduct of body, speech, and mind, who did not revile the noble ones, who held right views and undertook actions under the influence of right views—with the break-up of the body, after death, have re-appeared in a good destination, a heavenly world.’ Thus—by means of the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human—he sees beings passing away and re-appearing, and he discerns how they are inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate in accordance with their kamma.
mn39:20.3 | S: Suppose there were two houses with doors. A person with clear eyes standing in between them would see humans entering and leaving a house and wandering to and fro. | T: “Just as if there were a tall building in the central square (of a town), and a man with good eyesight standing on top of it were to see people entering a house, leaving it, walking along the street, and sitting in the central square. The thought would occur to him, ‘These people are entering a house, leaving it, walking along the streets, and sitting in the central square.’
mn39:20.4 | S: In the same way, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. | T: In the same way—with his mind thus concentrated, purified, and bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, and attained to imperturbability—the monk directs and inclines it to knowledge of the passing away and re-appearance of beings. He sees—by means of the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human—beings passing away and re-appearing, and he discerns how they are inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate in accordance with their kamma.…
mn39:21.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward knowledge of the ending of defilements. | T: “With his mind thus concentrated, purified, and bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, and attained to imperturbability, the monk directs and inclines it to the knowledge of the ending of the effluents.
mn39:21.2 | S: They truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.’ | T: He discerns, as it is has come to be, that ‘This is stress… This is the origination of stress… This is the cessation of stress… This is the way leading to the cessation of stress…
mn39:21.3 | S: They truly understand: ‘These are defilements’ … ‘This is the origin of defilements’ … ‘This is the cessation of defilements’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements.’ | T: These are effluents… This is the origination of effluents… This is the cessation of effluents… This is the way leading to the cessation of effluents.’
mn39:21.4 | S: Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. | T: His heart, thus knowing, thus seeing, is released from the effluent of sensuality, released from the effluent of becoming, released from the effluent of ignorance.
mn39:21.5 | S: When they’re freed, they know they’re freed. | T: With release, there is the knowledge, ‘Released.’
mn39:21.6 | S: They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’ | T: He discerns that ‘Birth is ended, the holy life fulfilled, the task done. There is nothing further for this world.’
mn39:21.7 | S: Suppose that in a mountain glen there was a lake that was transparent, clear, and unclouded. A person with clear eyes standing on the bank would see the clams and mussels, pebbles and gravel, and schools of fish swimming about or staying still. | T: “Just as if there were a pool of water in a mountain glen—clear, limpid, and unsullied—
mn39:21.8 | P: Tattha cakkhumā puriso tīre ṭhito passeyya sippisambukampi sakkharakathalampi macchagumbampi, carantampi tiṭṭhantampi. | T: where a man with good eyesight standing on the bank could see shells, gravel, and pebbles, and also shoals of fish swimming about and resting,
mn39:21.9 | S: They’d think: | T: and it would occur to him,
mn39:21.10 | S: ‘This lake is transparent, clear, and unclouded. And here are the clams and mussels, pebbles and gravel, and schools of fish swimming about or staying still.’ | T: ‘This pool of water is clear, limpid, and unsullied. Here are these shells, gravel, and pebbles, and also these shoals of fish swimming about and resting.’
mn39:21.11 | S: In the same way, a mendicant truly understands: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.’ | T: In the same way—with his mind thus concentrated, purified, and bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, and attained to imperturbability—the monk directs and inclines it to the knowledge of the ending of the effluents. He discerns, as it has come to be, that ‘This is stress… This is the origination of stress… This is the cessation of stress… This is the way leading to the cessation of stress… These are effluents… This is the origination of effluents… This is the cessation of effluents… This is the way leading to the cessation of effluents.’ His heart, thus knowing, thus seeing, is released from the effluent of sensuality, released from the effluent of becoming, released from the effluent of ignorance. With release, there is the knowledge, ‘Released.’
mn39:21.12 | S: They understand: ‘… there is nothing further for this place.’ | T: He discerns that ‘Birth is ended, the holy life fulfilled, the task done. There is nothing further for this world.’
mn39:22.1 | S: This mendicant is one who is called an ‘ascetic’, a ‘brahmin’, a ‘bathed initiate’, a ‘knowledge master’, a ‘scholar’, a ‘noble one’, and also a ‘perfected one’. | T: “This, monks, is called a monk who is a contemplative, a brahman, washed, a master, learned, noble, an arahant.
mn39:23.1 | S: And how is a mendicant an ascetic? | T: “And how is a monk a contemplative [samaṇa]?
mn39:23.2 | S: They have assuaged the bad, unskillful qualities that are corrupting, leading to future lives, hurtful, resulting in suffering and future rebirth, old age, and death. | T: His evil, unskillful qualities that are defiled, that lead to further becoming, create trouble, ripen in stress, and lead to future birth, aging, & death have been calmed [samita].
mn39:23.3 | S: That’s how a mendicant is an ascetic. | T: This is how a monk is a contemplative.
mn39:24.1 | S: And how is a mendicant a brahmin? | T: “And how is a monk a brahman?
mn39:24.2 | S: They have banished the bad, unskillful qualities. | T: His evil, unskillful qualities that are defiled, that lead to further becoming, create trouble, ripen in stress, and lead to future birth, aging, & death have been expelled [bahita].
mn39:24.3 | S: That’s how a mendicant is a brahmin. | T: This is how a monk is a brahman.
mn39:25.1 | S: And how is a mendicant a bathed initiate? | T: “And how is a monk washed?
mn39:25.2 | S: They have bathed off the bad, unskillful qualities. | T: His evil, unskillful qualities that are defiled, that lead to further becoming, create trouble, ripen in stress, and lead to future birth, aging, & death have been washed away.
mn39:25.3 | S: That’s how a mendicant is a bathed initiate. | T: This is how a monk is washed.
mn39:26.1 | S: And how is a mendicant a knowledge master? | T: “And how is a monk a master?
mn39:26.2 | S: They have known the bad, unskillful qualities. | T: His evil, unskillful qualities that are defiled, that lead to further becoming, create trouble, ripen in stress, and lead to future birth, aging, & death have been mastered.
mn39:26.3 | S: That’s how a mendicant is a knowledge master. | T: This is how a monk is a master.
mn39:27.1 | S: And how is a mendicant a scholar? | T: “And how is a monk learned [sottiya]?
mn39:27.2 | S: They have scoured off the bad, unskillful qualities. | T: His evil, unskillful qualities that are defiled, that lead to further becoming, create trouble, ripen in stress, and lead to future birth, aging, & death have streamed away [nissuta].
mn39:27.3 | S: That’s how a mendicant is a scholar. | T: This is how a monk is learned.
mn39:28.1 | S: And how is a mendicant a noble one? | T: “And how is a monk noble [ariya]?
mn39:28.2 | S: They have nobbled their foes, the bad, unskillful qualities. | T: His evil, unskillful qualities that are defiled, that lead to further becoming, create trouble, ripen in stress, and lead to future birth, aging, & death have gone far away [ārakā].
mn39:28.3 | S: That’s how a mendicant is a noble one. | T: This is how a monk is noble.
mn39:29.1 | S: And how is a mendicant a perfected one? | T: “And how is a monk an arahant?
mn39:29.2 | S: They are impeccably remote from the bad, unskillful qualities that are corrupting, leading to future lives, hurtful, resulting in suffering and future rebirth, old age, and death. | T: His evil, unskillful qualities that are defiled, that lead to further becoming, create trouble, ripen in stress, and lead to future birth, aging, & death have gone far away [ārakā].
mn39:29.3 | S: That’s how a mendicant is a perfected one.” | T: This is how a monk is an arahant.”
mn39:29.4 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: That is what the Blessed One said.
mn39:29.5 | S: Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said. | T: Gratified, the monks delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
mn39:29.6 | P: Mahāassapurasuttaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ navamaṁ. | T: (none)

## mn53
mn53:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: I have heard that
mn53:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. | T: on one occasion the Blessed One was staying among the Sakyans at Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Park.
mn53:2.1 | S: Now at that time a new town hall had recently been constructed for the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu. It had not yet been occupied by an ascetic or brahmin or any human at all. | T: Now at that time a new reception hall had just been built by the Kapilavatthu Sakyans, and it had not yet been dwelled in by any contemplative, brahman, or anyone at all in human form.
mn53:2.2 | S: Then the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: | T: So the Kapilavatthu Sakyans went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As they were sitting there they said to him,
mn53:2.3 | S: “Sir, a new town hall has recently been constructed for the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu. It has not yet been occupied by an ascetic or brahmin or any human at all. | T: “Lord, a new reception hall has just been built by the Kapilavatthu Sakyans, and it has not yet been dwelled in by any contemplative, brahman, or anyone at all in human form.
mn53:2.4 | S: May the Buddha be the first to use it, and only then will the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu use it. | T: May the Blessed One be the first to use it. When the Blessed One has used it first, the Kapilavatthu Sakyans will use it afterwards.
mn53:2.5 | S: That would be for the lasting welfare and happiness of the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu.” | T: That will be for their long-term welfare & happiness.”
mn53:3.1 | S: The Buddha consented with silence. | T: The Blessed One acquiesced with silence.
mn53:3.2 | S: Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, the Sakyans got up from their seat, bowed and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on their right. Then they went to the new town hall, where they spread carpets all over, prepared seats, set up a water jar, and placed an oil lamp. Then they went back to the Buddha, | T: Sensing his acquiescence, the Kapilavatthu Sakyans got up from their seats, bowed down to him, circumambulated him, and then went to the new reception hall. On arrival, they spread it all over with felt rugs, arranged seats, set out a water vessel, and raised an oil lamp. Then they went to the Blessed One and, on arrival,
mn53:3.3 | S: bowed, stood to one side, | T: having bowed down to him, stood to one side.
mn53:3.4 | S: and told him of their preparations, saying, | T: As they were standing there they said to him,
mn53:3.5 | P: “sabbasanthariṁ santhataṁ, bhante, santhāgāraṁ, āsanāni paññattāni, udakamaṇiko upaṭṭhāpito, telappadīpo āropito. | T: “Lord, the reception hall has been covered all over with felt rugs, seats have been arranged, a water vessel has been set out, and an oil lamp raised.
mn53:3.6 | S: “Please, sir, come at your convenience.” | T: It is now time for the Blessed One to do as he sees fit.”
mn53:4.1 | S: Then the Buddha robed up and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the new town hall together with the Saṅgha of mendicants. Having washed his feet, he entered the town hall and sat against the central column facing east. | T: So the Blessed One—after adjusting his lower robe and taking his bowl & outer robe—went together with a Saṅgha of monks to the reception hall. On arrival he washed his feet, entered the hall, and sat with his back to the central post, facing east.
mn53:4.2 | S: The Saṅgha of mendicants also washed their feet, entered the town hall, and sat against the west wall facing east, with the Buddha right in front of them. | T: The Saṅgha of monks washed their feet, entered the hall, and sat with their backs to the western wall, facing east, ranged around the Blessed One.
mn53:4.3 | S: The Sakyans of Kapilavatthu also washed their feet, entered the town hall, and sat against the east wall facing west, with the Buddha right in front of them. | T: The Kapilavatthu Sakyans washed their feet, entered the hall, and sat with their backs to the eastern wall, facing west, ranged around the Blessed One.
mn53:5.1 | S: The Buddha spent much of the night educating, encouraging, firing up, and inspiring the Sakyans with a Dhamma talk. Then he addressed Venerable Ānanda, | T: Then the Blessed One—having spent most of the night instructing, urging, rousing, & encouraging the Kapilavatthu Sakyans with a Dhamma talk—said to Ven. Ānanda,
mn53:5.2 | S: “Ānanda, speak about the practicing trainee to the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu as you feel inspired. | T: “Ānanda, speak to the Kapilavatthu Sakyans about the person who follows the practice for one in training.
mn53:5.3 | S: My back is sore, | T: My back aches.
mn53:5.4 | S: I’ll stretch it.” | T: I will rest it.”
mn53:5.5 | S: “Yes, sir,” Ānanda replied. | T: Ven. Ānanda responded, “As you say, lord.”
mn53:5.6 | S: And then the Buddha spread out his outer robe folded in four and laid down in the lion’s posture—on the right side, placing one foot on top of the other—mindful and aware, and focused on the time of getting up. | T: Then the Blessed One, having arranged his outer robe folded in four, lay down on his right side in the lion’s sleeping posture, with one foot on top of the other, mindful & alert, having made a mental note to get up.
mn53:6.1 | S: Then Ānanda addressed Mahānāma the Sakyan: | T: Then Ven. Ānanda addressed Mahānāma the Sakyan:
mn53:6.2 | S: “Mahānāma, a noble disciple is accomplished in ethics, guards the sense doors, eats in moderation, and is dedicated to wakefulness. They have seven good qualities, and they get the four absorptions—blissful meditations in this life that belong to the higher mind—when they want, without trouble or difficulty. | T: “There is the case, Mahānāma, where a disciple of the noble ones is consummate in virtue, guards the doors to his sense faculties, knows moderation in eating, is devoted to wakefulness, is endowed with seven qualities, and obtains at will—without trouble or difficulty—the four jhānas that constitute heightened awareness and a pleasant abiding in the here & now.
mn53:7.1 | S: And how is a noble disciple accomplished in ethics? | T: “And how is the disciple of the noble ones consummate in virtue?
mn53:7.2 | S: It’s when a noble disciple is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. | T: There is the case where the disciple of the noble ones is virtuous. He dwells restrained in accordance with the Pāṭimokkha, consummate in his behavior & sphere of activity. He trains himself, having undertaken the training rules, seeing danger in the slightest faults.
mn53:7.3 | S: That’s how a noble disciple is ethical. | T: This is how the disciple of the noble ones is consummate in virtue.
mn53:8.1 | S: And how does a noble disciple guard the sense doors? | T: “And how does the disciple of the noble ones guard the doors to his sense faculties?
mn53:8.2 | S: When a noble disciple sees a sight with their eyes, they don’t get caught up in the features and details. | T: There is the case where the disciple of the noble ones, on seeing a form with the eye, doesn’t grasp at any theme or variations by which—
mn53:8.3 | S: If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint. | T: if he were to dwell without restraint over the faculty of the eye—evil, unskillful qualities such as greed or distress might assail him. He practices with restraint. He guards the faculty of the eye. He achieves restraint with regard to the faculty of the eye.
mn53:8.4 | S: When they hear a sound with their ears … | T: “On hearing a sound with the ear.…
mn53:8.5 | S: When they smell an odor with their nose … | T: “On smelling an aroma with the nose.…
mn53:8.6 | S: When they taste a flavor with their tongue … | T: “On tasting a flavor with the tongue.…
mn53:8.7 | S: When they feel a touch with their body … | T: “On feeling a tactile sensation with the body.…
mn53:8.8 | S: When they know an idea with their mind, they don’t get caught up in the features and details. | T: “On cognizing an idea with the intellect, he doesn’t grasp at any theme or variations by which—
mn53:8.9 | S: If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. | T: if he were to dwell without restraint over the faculty of the intellect—evil, unskillful qualities such as greed or distress might assail him. He practices with restraint. He guards the faculty of the intellect. He achieves restraint with regard to the faculty of the intellect.
mn53:8.10 | S: That’s how a noble disciple guards the sense doors. | T: This is how the disciple of the noble ones guards the doors to his sense faculties.
mn53:9.1 | S: And how does a noble disciple eat in moderation? | T: “And how does the disciple of the noble ones know moderation in eating?
mn53:9.2 | S: It’s when a noble disciple reflects rationally on the food that they eat: | T: There is the case where the disciple of the noble ones, considering it appropriately, takes his food
mn53:9.3 | S: ‘Not for fun, indulgence, adornment, or decoration, but only to sustain this body, to avoid harm, and to support spiritual practice. In this way, I shall put an end to old discomfort and not give rise to new discomfort, and I will have the means to keep going, blamelessness, and a comfortable abiding.’ | T: not playfully, nor for intoxication, nor for putting on bulk, nor for beautification, but simply for the survival & continuance of this body, for ending its afflictions, for the support of the holy life, thinking, ‘I will destroy old feelings (of hunger) & not create new feelings (from overeating). Thus I will maintain myself, be blameless, & live in comfort.’
mn53:9.4 | S: That’s how a noble disciple eats in moderation. | T: This is how the disciple of the noble ones knows moderation in eating.
mn53:10.1 | S: And how is a noble disciple dedicated to wakefulness? | T: “And how is the disciple of the noble ones devoted to wakefulness?
mn53:10.2 | S: It’s when a noble disciple practices walking and sitting meditation by day, purifying their mind from obstacles. | T: There is the case where a monk during the day, sitting & pacing back & forth, cleanses his mind of any qualities that would hold the mind in check.
mn53:10.3 | S: In the first watch of the night, they continue to practice walking and sitting meditation. | T: During the first watch of the night [dusk to 10 p.m.], sitting & pacing back & forth, he cleanses his mind of any qualities that would hold the mind in check.
mn53:10.4 | S: In the middle watch, they lie down in the lion’s posture—on the right side, placing one foot on top of the other—mindful and aware, and focused on the time of getting up. | T: During the second watch of the night [10 p.m. to 2 a.m.], reclining on his right side, he takes up the lion’s posture, one foot placed on top of the other, mindful, alert, with his mind set on getting up [either as soon as he awakens or at a particular time].
mn53:10.5 | S: In the last watch, they get up and continue to practice walking and sitting meditation, purifying their mind from obstacles. | T: During the last watch of the night [2 a.m. to dawn], sitting & pacing back & forth, he cleanses his mind of any qualities that would hold the mind in check.
mn53:10.6 | S: That’s how a noble disciple is dedicated to wakefulness. | T: This is how the monk is devoted to wakefulness.
mn53:11.1 | S: And how does a noble disciple have seven good qualities? | T: “And how is the disciple of the noble ones endowed with seven qualities?
mn53:11.2 | S: It’s when a noble disciple has faith in the Realized One’s awakening: | T: “[1] There is the case where the disciple of the noble ones has conviction, is convinced of the Tathāgata’s awakening:
mn53:11.3 | S: ‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ | T: ‘Indeed, the Blessed One is worthy & rightly self-awakened, consummate in clear-knowing & conduct, well-gone, an expert with regard to the cosmos, unexcelled trainer of people fit to be tamed, teacher of devas & human beings, awakened, blessed.’
mn53:12.1 | S: They have a conscience. They’re conscientious about bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and conscientious about having any bad, unskillful qualities. | T: “[2] He feels shame at (the thought of engaging in) bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, mental misconduct.
mn53:13.1 | S: They exercise prudence. They’re prudent when it comes to bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and prudent when it comes to acquiring any bad, unskillful qualities. | T: “[3] He feels compunction over (the suffering that would result from) bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, mental misconduct.
mn53:14.1 | S: They’re very learned, remembering and keeping what they’ve learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and penetrating them theoretically. | T: “[4] He has heard much, has retained what he has heard, has stored what he has heard. Whatever teachings are admirable in the beginning, admirable in the middle, admirable in the end, that—in their meaning & expression—proclaim the holy life that is entirely complete & pure: those he has listened to often, retained, discussed, accumulated, examined with his mind, and well-penetrated in terms of his views.
mn53:15.1 | S: They live with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They’re strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities. | T: “[5] He keeps his persistence aroused for abandoning unskillful qualities and taking on skillful qualities. He is steadfast, solid in his effort, not shirking his duties with regard to skillful qualities.
mn53:16.1 | S: They’re mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and alertness, and can remember and recall what was said and done long ago. | T: “[6] He is mindful, highly meticulous, remembering & able to call to mind even things that were done & said long ago.
mn53:17.1 | S: They’re wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. | T: “[7] He is discerning, endowed with discernment of arising & passing away—noble, penetrating, leading to the right ending of stress.
mn53:17.2 | S: That’s how a noble disciple has seven good qualities. | T: “This is how the disciple of the noble ones is endowed with seven qualities.
mn53:18.1 | S: And how does a noble disciple get the four absorptions—blissful meditations in this life that belong to the higher mind—when they want, without trouble or difficulty? | T: “And how does the disciple of the noble ones obtain at will—without trouble or difficulty—the four jhānas that constitute heightened awareness and a pleasant abiding in the here & now?
mn53:18.2 | S: It’s when a noble disciple, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption … | T: There is the case where, quite secluded from sensuality, secluded from unskillful qualities, the disciple of the noble ones enters & remains in the first jhāna: rapture & pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by directed thought & evaluation.
mn53:18.3 | S: second absorption … | T: With the stilling of directed thoughts & evaluations, he enters & remains in the second jhāna: rapture & pleasure born of concentration, unification of awareness free from directed thought & evaluation—internal assurance.
mn53:18.4 | S: third absorption … | T: With the fading of rapture he remains equanimous, mindful, & alert, and senses pleasure with the body. He enters & remains in the third jhāna, of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous & mindful, he has a pleasant abiding.’
mn53:18.5 | S: fourth absorption. | T: With the abandoning of pleasure & pain—as with the earlier disappearance of elation & distress—he enters & remains in the fourth jhāna: purity of equanimity & mindfulness, neither pleasure nor pain.
mn53:18.6 | S: That’s how a noble disciple gets the four absorptions—blissful meditations in this life that belong to the higher mind—when they want, without trouble or difficulty. | T: This is how the disciple of the noble ones obtains at will—without trouble or difficulty—the four jhānas that constitute heightened awareness and a pleasant abiding in the here & now.
mn53:19.1 | S: When a noble disciple is accomplished in ethics, guards the sense doors, eats in moderation, and is dedicated to wakefulness; and they have seven good qualities, and they get the four absorptions—blissful meditations in this life that belong to the higher mind—when they want, without trouble or difficulty, they are called a noble disciple who is a practicing trainee. Their eggs are unspoiled, and they are capable of breaking out of their shell, becoming awakened, and achieving the supreme sanctuary from the yoke. | T: “Now, when a disciple of the noble ones is consummate in virtue in this way, guards the doors to his sense faculties in this way, knows moderation in eating in this way, is devoted to wakefulness in this way, is endowed with seven qualities in this way, and obtains at will—without trouble or difficulty—the four jhānas that constitute heightened awareness and a pleasant abiding in the here & now in this way, then he is called a disciple of the noble ones who follows the practice for one in training, whose eggs are unspoiled, who is capable of breaking out, capable of awakening, capable of attaining the supreme rest from the yoke.
mn53:19.2 | S: Suppose there was a chicken with eight or ten or twelve eggs. And she properly sat on them to keep them warm and incubated. Even if that chicken doesn’t wish, | T: “Just as if a hen had eight, ten, or twelve eggs that she covered rightly, warmed rightly, & incubated rightly: Even though this wish did not occur to her—
mn53:19.3 | S: ‘If only my chicks could break out of the eggshell with their claws and beak and hatch safely!’ | T: ‘O that my chicks might break through the egg shells with their spiked claws or beaks and hatch out safely!’—
mn53:19.4 | S: Still they can break out and hatch safely. | T: still it is possible that the chicks would break through the shells with their spiked claws or beaks and hatch out safely.
mn53:19.5 | S: In the same way, when a noble disciple is practicing all these things they are called a noble disciple who is a practicing trainee. Their eggs are unspoiled, and they are capable of breaking out of their shell, becoming awakened, and achieving the supreme sanctuary from the yoke. | T: In the same way, when a disciple of the noble ones is consummate in virtue in this way, guards the doors to his sense faculties in this way, knows moderation in eating in this way, is devoted to wakefulness in this way, is endowed with seven qualities in this way, and obtains at will—without trouble or difficulty—the four jhānas that constitute heightened awareness and a pleasant abiding in the here & now in this way, then he is called a disciple of the noble ones who follows the practice for one in training, whose eggs are unspoiled, who is capable of breaking out, capable of awakening, capable of attaining the supreme rest from the yoke.
mn53:20.1 | S: Relying on this supreme purity of mindfulness and equanimity, that noble disciple recollects their many kinds of past lives. | T: “Now when the disciple of the noble ones has arrived at this purity of equanimity & mindfulness, he recollects his manifold past lives,
mn53:20.2 | S: That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. … And so they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details. | T: i.e., one birth, two… five, ten… fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand, many eons of cosmic contraction, many eons of cosmic expansion, many eons of cosmic contraction & expansion: ‘There I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance. Such was my food, such my experience of pleasure & pain, such the end of my life. Passing away from that state, I re-arose there. There too I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance. Such was my food, such my experience of pleasure & pain, such the end of my life. Passing away from that state, I re-arose here.’ Thus he recollects his manifold past lives in their modes & details.
mn53:20.3 | S: This is their first breaking out, like a chick from an eggshell. | T: This is his first breaking out, like that of the hen’s chicks from their shells.
mn53:21.1 | S: Relying on this supreme purity of mindfulness and equanimity, that noble disciple, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. … They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. | T: “When the disciple of the noble ones has arrived at this purity of equanimity & mindfulness, he sees—by means of the divine eye, purified & surpassing the human—beings passing away & re-appearing, and he discerns how they are inferior & superior, beautiful & ugly, fortunate & unfortunate in accordance with their kamma: ‘These beings—who were endowed with bad conduct of body, speech & mind, who reviled noble ones, held wrong views and undertook actions under the influence of wrong views—with the break-up of the body, after death, have re-appeared in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell. But these beings—who were endowed with good conduct of body, speech, & mind, who did not revile noble ones, who held right views and undertook actions under the influence of right views—with the break-up of the body, after death, have re-appeared in a good destination, a heavenly world.’ Thus—by means of the divine eye, purified & surpassing the human—he sees beings passing away & re-appearing, and he discerns how they are inferior & superior, beautiful & ugly, fortunate & unfortunate in accordance with their kamma.
mn53:21.2 | S: This is their second breaking out, like a chick from an eggshell. | T: This is his second breaking out, like that of the hen’s chicks from their shells.
mn53:22.1 | S: Relying on this supreme purity of mindfulness and equanimity, that noble disciple realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom. And they live having realized it with their own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements. | T: “When the disciple of the noble ones has arrived at this purity of equanimity & mindfulness, he enters & remains in the effluent-free awareness-release & discernment-release, having directly known & realized them for himself right in the here & now.
mn53:22.2 | S: This is their third breaking out, like a chick from an eggshell. | T: This is his third breaking out, like that of the hen’s chicks from their shells.
mn53:23.1 | S: A noble disciple’s conduct includes the following: being accomplished in ethics, | T: “Now, when the disciple of the noble ones is consummate in virtue, that is a matter of his conduct.
mn53:23.2 | S: guarding the sense doors, | T: When he guards the doors to his sense faculties…
mn53:23.3 | S: moderation in eating, | T: knows moderation in eating…
mn53:23.4 | S: being dedicated to wakefulness, | T: is devoted to wakefulness…
mn53:23.5 | S: having seven good qualities, | T: is endowed with seven qualities, that is a matter of his conduct.
mn53:23.6 | S: and getting the four absorptions when they want, without trouble or difficulty. | T: When he obtains at will—without trouble or difficulty—the four jhānas that constitute heightened awareness and a pleasant abiding in the here & now, that is a matter of his conduct.
mn53:24.1 | S: A noble disciple’s knowledge includes the following: recollecting their past lives, | T: “When he recollects his manifold past lives… in their modes & details, that is a matter of his clear-knowing.
mn53:24.2 | S: clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, | T: When he sees—by means of the divine eye, purified & surpassing the human—beings passing away & re-appearing.…
mn53:24.3 | S: and realizing the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, having realized it with their own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements. | T: When he enters & remains in the effluent-free awareness-release & discernment-release, having directly known & realized them for himself right in the here & now, that is a matter of his clear knowing.
mn53:25.1 | S: This noble disciple is said to be ‘accomplished in knowledge’, and also ‘accomplished in conduct’, and also ‘accomplished in knowledge and conduct’. | T: “This, Mahānāma, is called a disciple of the noble ones who is consummate in clear-knowing, consummate in conduct, consummate in clear-knowing & conduct.
mn53:25.2 | S: And the divinity Sanaṅkumāra also spoke this verse: | T: And by the Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra this verse was said:
mn53:25.3 | S: ‘The aristocrat is best among people | T: ‘The noble warrior is the best among people
mn53:25.4 | S: who take clan as the standard. | T: when judging by clan.
mn53:25.5 | S: But one accomplished in knowledge and conduct | T: But a person consummate in clear-knowing & conduct,
mn53:25.6 | S: is best among gods and humans.’ | T: is the best of beings human & divine.’
mn53:25.7 | S: And that verse was well sung by the Divinity Sanaṅkumāra, not poorly sung; well spoken, not poorly spoken, beneficial, not harmful, and it was approved by the Buddha.” | T: “This verse was well-sung by the Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra, not ill-sung; well-said, not ill-said; connected with the goal, not unconnected with the goal. It was endorsed by the Blessed One.”
mn53:26.1 | S: Then the Buddha got up and said to Venerable Ānanda, | T: Then the Blessed One got up and said to Ven. Ānanda,
mn53:26.2 | S: “Good, good, Ānanda! | T: “Good, good, Ānanda.
mn53:26.3 | S: It’s good that you spoke to the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu about the practicing trainee.” | T: What you have said to the Kapilavatthu Sakyans about the person who follows the practice for one in training is good.”
mn53:26.4 | S: That is what Venerable Ānanda said, | T: That is what Ven. Ānanda said,
mn53:26.5 | S: and the Teacher concurred. | T: and the Teacher approved.
mn53:26.6 | S: Satisfied, the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu approved what Venerable Ānanda said. | T: Gratified, the Kapilavatthu Sakyans delighted in Ven. Ānanda’s words.
mn53:26.7 | P: Sekhasuttaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ tatiyaṁ. | T: (none)

