## mn60, continued
mn60:36.1 | S: And what individual mortifies themselves, committed to the practice of mortifying themselves? | T: “And which is the individual who torments himself and is devoted to the practice of torturing himself?
mn60:36.2 | S: It’s when a person goes naked, ignoring conventions. … | T: There is the case where a certain individual goes without cloth, rejecting conventions, licking his hands, not coming when called, not staying when asked. He does not accept food brought or specially made. He does not consent to an invitation (to a meal). He doesn’t receive anything from the mouth of a pot, from the mouth of a container, across a threshold, across a stick, across a pestle, from two eating together, from a pregnant woman, from a woman nursing a child, from a woman living with a man, from where it is announced that food is to be distributed, from where a dog is waiting, from where flies are buzzing. He accepts no meat, no distilled liquor, no wine, no fermented liquor. He limits himself to one house for one morsel, to two houses for two morsels… to seven houses for seven morsels. He lives on one saucerful a day, two saucerfuls a day… seven saucerfuls a day. He takes food once a day, once every two days… once every seven days, and so on up to once every half-month. He remains devoted to the practice of regulating his intake of food. He eats a diet of green vegetables or millet or wild rice or hide-parings or moss or rice bran or rice-water or sesame flour or grass or cow dung. He lives off forest roots & fruits. He eats fallen fruits. He clothes himself in hemp, in canvas, in shrouds, in thrown-away rags, in tree bark, in antelope hide, in wood-shavings fabric, in head-hair wool, in wild-animal wool, in owls’ wings. He is a hair-&-beard puller, one devoted to the practice of pulling out his hair & beard. He is a stander, one who rejects seats. He is a hands-around-the-knees sitter, one devoted to the exertion of sitting with his hands around his knees. He is a spike-mattresser, one who makes his bed on a bed of spikes. He is a third-time-in-the-evening bather, one who stays devoted to the practice of bathing in water.
mn60:36.3 | S: And so they live committed to practicing these various ways of mortifying and tormenting the body. | T: Thus, in these many ways, he is devoted to the practice of tormenting & torturing the body.
mn60:36.4 | S: This is called an individual who mortifies themselves, being committed to the practice of mortifying themselves. | T: This is called an individual who torments himself and is devoted to the practice of torturing himself.
mn60:37.1 | S: And what individual mortifies others, committed to the practice of mortifying others? | T: “And which is the individual who torments others and is devoted to the practice of torturing others?
mn60:37.2 | S: It’s when an individual is a butcher of sheep, pigs, poultry, or deer, a hunter or fisher, a bandit, an executioner, a butcher of cattle, a jailer, or has some other cruel livelihood. | T: There is the case where a certain individual is a butcher of sheep, a butcher of pigs, a butcher of fowl, a trapper, a hunter, a fisherman, a thief, an executioner, a prison warden, or anyone who follows any other bloody occupation.
mn60:37.3 | S: This is called an individual who mortifies others, being committed to the practice of mortifying others. | T: This is called an individual who torments others and is devoted to the practice of torturing others.
mn60:38.1 | S: And what individual mortifies themselves and others, being committed to the practice of mortifying themselves and others? | T: “And which is the individual who torments himself and is devoted to the practice of torturing himself, and also torments others and is devoted to the practice of torturing others?
mn60:38.2 | S: It’s when an individual is an anointed aristocratic king or a well-to-do brahmin. He has a new ceremonial hall built to the east of the citadel. He shaves off his hair and beard, dresses in a rough antelope hide, and smears his body with ghee and oil. … | T: There is the case where an individual is a head-anointed noble warrior king, or a brahman of great wealth. Having had a new temple built to the east of the city, having shaved off his hair & beard, having dressed himself in a rough hide, having smeared his body with ghee & oil, and scratching his back with a deer horn, he enters the new temple along with his chief queen & brahman high priest. There he makes his bed on the bare ground strewn with grass. The king lives off the milk from the first teat of a cow with an identical calf; the queen lives off the milk from the second teat; the brahman high priest, off the milk from the third teat. The milk from the fourth teat they pour into the fire. The calf lives on what is left. “He says, ‘Let so many bulls be slaughtered for the sacrifice. Let so many bullocks… so many heifers… so many goats… so many sheep.… Let so many horses be slaughtered for the sacrifice. Let so many trees be cut down for the sacrificial posts; let so many plants be mowed down for the sacrificial grass.’
mn60:38.3 | S: His bondservants, servants, and workers do their jobs under threat of punishment and danger, weeping, with tearful faces. | T: And his slaves, servants, & workers make preparations, weeping with tearful faces, spurred on by punishment, spurred on by fear.
mn60:38.4 | S: This is called an individual who mortifies themselves and others, being committed to the practice of mortifying themselves and others. | T: This is called an individual who torments himself and is devoted to the practice of torturing himself, and also torments others and is devoted to the practice of torturing others.
mn60:39.1 | S: And what individual doesn’t mortify either themselves or others, committed to the practice of not mortifying themselves or others, | T: “And which is the individual who neither torments himself nor is devoted to the practice of torturing himself, neither torments others nor is devoted to the practice of torturing others;
mn60:39.2 | S: living without wishes in this very life, quenched, cooled, experiencing bliss, with self become divine? | T: who—neither tormenting himself nor tormenting others—dwells in the here & now free of hunger, unbound, cooled, sensitive to happiness with a Brahmā-like mind?
mn60:40-54.1 | S: It’s when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully awakened Buddha … | T: “There is the case where a Tathāgata appears in the world, worthy & rightly self-awakened. He teaches the Dhamma admirable in its beginning, admirable in its middle, admirable in its end. He proclaims the holy life both in its particulars and in its essence, entirely perfect, surpassingly pure.
mn60:40-54.2 | S: A householder hears that teaching, or a householder’s child, or someone reborn in some good family. … | T: “A householder or householder’s son, hearing the Dhamma, gains conviction in the Tathāgata and reflects: ‘Household life is confining, a dusty path. Life gone forth is the open air. It isn’t easy, living at home, to practice the holy life totally perfect, totally pure, a polished shell. What if I, having shaved off my hair & beard and putting on the ochre robe, were to go forth from the household life into homelessness?’ “So after some time he abandons his mass of wealth, large or small; leaves his circle of relatives, large or small; shaves off his hair and beard, puts on the ochre robes, and goes forth from the household life into homelessness. Virtue “When he has thus gone forth, endowed with the monks’ training & livelihood, then—abandoning the taking of life—he abstains from the taking of life. He dwells with his rod laid down, his knife laid down, scrupulous, merciful, sympathetic for the welfare of all living beings. “Abandoning the taking of what is not given, he abstains from taking what is not given. He takes only what is given, accepts only what is given, lives not by stealth but by means of a self that has become pure. “Abandoning uncelibacy, he lives a celibate life, aloof, refraining from the sexual act that is the villager’s way. “Abandoning false speech, he abstains from false speech. He speaks the truth, holds to the truth, is firm, reliable, no deceiver of the world. “Abandoning divisive speech he abstains from divisive speech. What he has heard here he does not tell there to break those people apart from these people here. What he has heard there he does not tell here to break these people apart from those people there. Thus reconciling those who have broken apart or cementing those who are united, he loves concord, delights in concord, enjoys concord, speaks things that create concord. “Abandoning abusive speech, he abstains from abusive speech. He speaks words that are soothing to the ear, that are affectionate, that go to the heart, that are polite, appealing and pleasing to people at large. “Abandoning idle chatter, he abstains from idle chatter. He speaks in season, speaks what is factual, what is in accordance with the goal, the Dhamma, and the Vinaya. He speaks words worth treasuring, seasonable, reasonable, circumscribed, connected with the goal. “He abstains from damaging seed and plant life. “He eats only once a day, refraining from the evening meal and from food at the wrong time of day. “He abstains from dancing, singing, instrumental music, and from watching shows. “He abstains from wearing garlands and from beautifying himself with scents and cosmetics. “He abstains from high and luxurious beds and seats. “He abstains from accepting gold and money. “He abstains from accepting uncooked grain… raw meat… women and girls… male and female slaves… goats and sheep… fowl and pigs… elephants, cattle, steeds, and mares… fields and property. “He abstains from running messages… from buying and selling… from dealing with false scales, false metals, and false measures… from bribery, deception, and fraud. “He abstains from mutilating, executing, imprisoning, highway robbery, plunder, and violence. “He is content with a set of robes to provide for his body and alms food to provide for his hunger. Just as a bird, wherever it goes, flies with its wings as its only burden; so too is he content with a set of robes to provide for his body and alms food to provide for his hunger. Wherever he goes, he takes only his barest necessities along. “Endowed with this noble aggregate of virtue, he is inwardly sensitive to the pleasure of being blameless. Sense Restraint “On seeing a form with the eye, he does not grasp at any theme or details by which—if he were to dwell without restraint over the faculty of the eye—evil, unskillful qualities such as greed or distress might assail him. On hearing a sound with the ear.… On smelling an aroma with the nose.… On tasting a flavor with the tongue.… On touching a tactile sensation with the body.… On cognizing an idea with the intellect, he does not grasp at any theme or details by which—if he were to dwell without restraint over the faculty of the intellect—evil, unskillful qualities such as greed or distress might assail him. Endowed with this noble restraint over the sense faculties, he is inwardly sensitive to the pleasure of being blameless. Mindfulness & Alertness “When going forward and returning, he makes himself alert. When looking toward and looking away… when bending and extending his limbs… when carrying his outer cloak, his upper robe, and his bowl… when eating, drinking, chewing, and tasting… when urinating and defecating… when walking, standing, sitting, falling asleep, waking up, talking, and remaining silent, he makes himself alert. Abandoning the Hindrances “Endowed with this noble aggregate of virtue, this noble restraint over the sense faculties, this noble mindfulness & alertness, he seeks out a secluded dwelling: a wilderness, the shade of a tree, a mountain, a glen, a hillside cave, a charnel ground, a forest grove, the open air, a heap of straw. After his meal, returning from his alms round, he sits down, crosses his legs, holds his body erect, and brings mindfulness to the fore. “Abandoning covetousness with regard to the world, he dwells with an awareness devoid of covetousness. He cleanses his mind of covetousness. Abandoning ill will and anger, he dwells with an awareness devoid of ill will, sympathetic with the welfare of all living beings. He cleanses his mind of ill will and anger. Abandoning sloth and drowsiness, he dwells with an awareness devoid of sloth and drowsiness, mindful, alert, percipient of light. He cleanses his mind of sloth and drowsiness. Abandoning restlessness and anxiety, he dwells undisturbed, his mind inwardly stilled. He cleanses his mind of restlessness and anxiety. Abandoning uncertainty, he dwells having crossed over uncertainty, with no perplexity with regard to skillful qualities. He cleanses his mind of uncertainty.
mn60:40-54.3 | S: They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken wisdom. | T: The Four Jhānas “Having abandoned these five hindrances—imperfections of awareness that weaken discernment—
mn60:40-54.4 | S: Then, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption … | T: then, quite secluded from sensuality, secluded from unskillful qualities, he enters and remains in the first jhāna: rapture & pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by directed thought & evaluation.
mn60:40-54.5 | S: second absorption … | T: “Then, with the stilling of directed thoughts & evaluations, he enters and remains in the second jhāna: rapture & pleasure born of concentration, unification of awareness free from directed thought & evaluation—internal assurance.
mn60:40-54.6 | S: third absorption … | T: “Then, with the fading of rapture, he remains equanimous, mindful, & alert, and senses pleasure with the body. He enters and remains in the third jhāna, of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous & mindful, he has a pleasant abiding.’
mn60:40-54.7 | S: fourth absorption. | T: “Then, with the abandoning of pleasure & pain—as with the earlier disappearance of elation & distress—he enters and remains in the fourth jhāna: purity of equanimity & mindfulness, neither pleasure nor pain.
mn60:55.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward recollection of past lives. … | T: The Three Knowledges “With his mind thus concentrated, purified, and bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to knowledge of the recollection of past lives (lit: previous homes).
mn60:55.2 | S: They recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details. | T: He recollects his manifold past lives, i.e., one birth, two births, three births, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, one hundred, one thousand, one hundred thousand, many eons of cosmic contraction, many eons of cosmic expansion, many eons of cosmic contraction and expansion, (recollecting,) ‘There I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance. Such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such the end of my life. Passing away from that state, I re-arose there. There too I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance. Such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such the end of my life. Passing away from that state, I re-arose here.’ Thus he recollects his manifold past lives in their modes and details. This, too, is how striving is fruitful, how exertion is fruitful.
mn60:55.3 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings. | T: “With his mind thus concentrated, purified, and bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to knowledge of the passing away and re-appearance of beings.
mn60:55.4 | S: With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. … They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. | T: He sees—by means of the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human—beings passing away and re-appearing, and he discerns how they are inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate in accordance with their kamma: ‘These beings—who were endowed with bad conduct of body, speech, and mind, who reviled the noble ones, held wrong views and undertook actions under the influence of wrong views—with the breakup of the body, after death, have re-appeared in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell. But these beings—who were endowed with good conduct of body, speech, and mind, who did not revile the noble ones, who held right views and undertook actions under the influence of right views—with the breakup of the body, after death, have re-appeared in a good destination, a heavenly world.’ Thus—by means of the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human—he sees beings passing away and re-appearing, and he discerns how they are inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate in accordance with their kamma.
mn60:55.5 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward knowledge of the ending of defilements. | T: “With his mind thus concentrated, purified, and bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, and attained to imperturbability, the monk directs and inclines it to the knowledge of the ending of the effluents.
mn60:55.6 | S: They truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. | T: He discerns, as it has come to be, that ‘This is stress… This is the origination of stress… This is the cessation of stress… This is the way leading to the cessation of stress…
mn60:55.7 | S: They truly understand: ‘These are defilements’ … ‘This is the origin of defilements’ … ‘This is the cessation of defilements’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements’. | T: These are effluents… This is the origination of effluents… This is the cessation of effluents… This is the way leading to the cessation of effluents.’
mn60:55.8 | S: Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. | T: His heart, thus knowing, thus seeing, is released from the effluent of sensuality, released from the effluent of becoming, released from the effluent of ignorance.
mn60:55.9 | S: When they’re freed, they know they’re freed. | T: With release, there is the knowledge, ‘Released.’
mn60:55.10 | S: They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’ | T: He discerns that ‘Birth is ended, the holy life fulfilled, the task done. There is nothing further for this world.’
mn60:56.1 | S: This is called an individual who neither mortifies themselves or others, being committed to the practice of not mortifying themselves or others. | T: “This is called an individual who neither torments himself nor is devoted to the practice of torturing himself, who neither torments others nor is devoted to the practice of torturing others.
mn60:56.2 | S: They live without wishes in this very life, quenched, cooled, experiencing bliss, with self become divine.” | T: Neither tormenting himself nor tormenting others, he dwells in the here & now free of hunger, unbound, cooled, sensitive to happiness, with a Brahmā-like mind.”
mn60:57.1 | S: When he had spoken, the brahmins and householders of Sālā said to the Buddha, | T: When this was said, the brahman householders of Sāla said,
mn60:57.2 | S: “Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! | T: “Magnificent, master Gotama! Magnificent!
mn60:57.3 | S: As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, worthy Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. | T: Just as if he were to place upright what was overturned, to reveal what was hidden, to show the way to one who was lost, or to carry a lamp into the dark so that those with eyes could see forms, in the same way has master Gotama—through many lines of reasoning—made the Dhamma clear.
mn60:57.4 | S: We go for refuge to the worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. | T: We go to master Gotama for refuge, to the Dhamma, and to the Saṅgha of monks.
mn60:57.5 | S: From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember us as lay followers who have gone for refuge for life.” | T: May master Gotama remember us as lay followers who have gone to him for refuge, from this day forward, for life.”
mn60:57.6 | P: Apaṇṇakasuttaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ dasamaṁ. | T: (none)
mn60:57.7 | P: Gahapativaggo niṭṭhito paṭhamo. | T: (none)
mn60:58.0 | P: Tassuddānaṁ | T: (none)
mn60:58.1 | P: Kandaranāgarasekhavato ca, | T: (none)
mn60:58.2 | P: Potaliyo puna jīvakabhacco; | T: (none)
mn60:58.3 | P: Upālidamatho kukkuraabhayo, | T: (none)
mn60:58.4 | P: Bahuvedanīyāpaṇṇakato dasamo. | T: (none)

## mn56
mn56:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: I have heard that
mn56:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Nāḷandā in Pāvārika’s Mango Grove. | T: on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Nālandā in Pāvarika’s mango grove.
mn56:2.1 | S: At that time the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan was residing at Nāḷandā together with a large assembly of Jain ascetics. | T: And on that occasion, the Nigaṇṭha Nāṭaputta was dwelling near Nālandā with a large following of Nigaṇṭhas.
mn56:2.2 | S: Then the Jain ascetic Dīgha Tapassī wandered for alms in Nāḷandā. After the meal, on his return from almsround, he went to Pāvārika’s Mango Grove. There he approached the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. | T: Then Dīgha Tapassin the Nigaṇṭha, after going for alms in Nālanda and returning from his almsround, after his meal went to the Blessed One in Pāvarika’s mango grove. On arrival, he exchanged courteous greetings with the Blessed One.
mn56:2.3 | S: When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he stood to one side. The Buddha said to him, | T: After an exchange of friendly greetings & courtesies, he stood to one side. As he was standing there, the Blessed One said to him,
mn56:2.4 | S: “There are seats, Tapassī. Please sit if you wish.” | T: “There are seats, Dīgha Tapassin. Sit down if you want.”
mn56:3.1 | S: When he said this, Dīgha Tapassī took a low seat and sat to one side. | T: When this was said, Dīgha Tapassin the Nigaṇṭha took a seat and sat to one side.
mn56:3.2 | S: The Buddha said to him, | T: As he was sitting there, the Blessed One said to him,
mn56:3.3 | S: “Tapassī, how many kinds of deed does the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan describe for performing bad deeds?” | T: “How many actions, Dīgha Tapassin, does the Nigaṇṭha Nāṭaputta describe for the making of evil kamma, the production of evil kamma?”
mn56:3.4 | S: “Reverend Gotama, the Jain Ñātika doesn’t usually speak in terms of ‘deeds’. | T: “Friend Gotama, the Nigaṇṭha Nāṭaputta isn’t used to using the term, ‘action.’
mn56:3.5 | S: He usually speaks in terms of ‘rods’.” | T: He’s used to using the term, ‘rod.’”
mn56:3.6 | S: “Then how many kinds of rod does the Jain Ñātika describe for performing bad deeds?” | T: “Then how many rods does the Nigaṇṭha Nāṭaputta describe for the making of evil kamma, the production of evil kamma?”
mn56:3.7 | S: “The Jain Ñātika describes three kinds of rod for performing bad deeds: | T: “Three are the rods that the Nigaṇṭha Nāṭaputta describes for the making of evil kamma, the production of evil kamma:
mn56:3.8 | S: the physical rod, the verbal rod, and the mental rod.” | T: the bodily rod, the verbal rod, & the mental rod.”
mn56:3.9 | S: “But are these kinds of rod all distinct from each other?” | T: “And is the bodily rod one thing, the verbal rod another, and the mental rod still another?”
mn56:3.10 | S: “Yes, each is quite distinct.” | T: “The bodily rod is one thing, the verbal rod another, and the mental rod still another.”
mn56:3.11 | S: “Of the three rods thus analyzed and differentiated, which rod does the Jain Ñātika describe as being the most blameworthy for performing bad deeds: the physical rod, the verbal rod, or the mental rod?” | T: “And of these three rods—thus analyzed, thus differentiated, Dīgha Tapassin—which rod does the Nigaṇṭha Nāṭaputta describe as the most greatly blameworthy for the making of evil kamma, the production of evil kamma: the bodily rod, the verbal rod, or the mental rod?”
mn56:3.12 | S: “The Jain Ñātika describes the physical rod as being the most blameworthy for performing bad deeds, not so much the verbal rod or the mental rod.” | T: “Of these three rods—thus analyzed, thus differentiated, friend Gotama—the Nigaṇṭha Nāṭaputta describes the bodily rod as the most greatly blameworthy for the making of evil kamma, the production of evil kamma, not so much the verbal rod, not so much the mental rod.”
mn56:3.13 | S: “Do you say the physical rod, Tapassī?” | T: “Do you say, ‘bodily rod,’ Dīgha Tapassin?”
mn56:3.14 | S: “I say the physical rod, Reverend Gotama.” | T: “I say, ‘bodily rod,’ friend Gotama.”
mn56:3.15 | S: “Do you say the physical rod, Tapassī?” | T: “Do you say, ‘bodily rod,’ Dīgha Tapassin?”
mn56:3.16 | S: “I say the physical rod, Reverend Gotama.” | T: “I say, ‘bodily rod,’ friend Gotama.”
mn56:3.17 | S: “Do you say the physical rod, Tapassī?” | T: “Do you say, ‘bodily rod,’ Dīgha Tapassin?”
mn56:3.18 | S: “I say the physical rod, Reverend Gotama.” | T: “I say, ‘bodily rod,’ friend Gotama.”
mn56:3.19 | S: Thus the Buddha made Dīgha Tapassī stand by this point up to the third time. | T: In this way did the Blessed One get Dīgha Tapassin to assert his position up to three times.
mn56:4.1 | S: When this was said, Dīgha Tapassī said to the Buddha, | T: When this was said, Dīgha Tapassin said to the Blessed One,
mn56:4.2 | S: “But Reverend Gotama, how many kinds of rod do you describe for performing bad deeds?” | T: “And what about you, friend Gotama? How many rods do you describe for the making of evil kamma, the production of evil kamma?”
mn56:4.3 | S: “Tapassī, the Realized One doesn’t usually speak in terms of ‘rods’. | T: “Dīgha Tapassin, the Tathāgata isn’t used to using the term, ‘rod.’
mn56:4.4 | S: He usually speaks in terms of ‘deeds’.” | T: He’s used to using the term, ‘action.’”
mn56:4.5 | S: “Then how many kinds of deed do you describe for performing bad deeds?” | T: “Then how many actions, friend Gotama, do you describe for the making of evil kamma, the production of evil kamma?”
mn56:4.6 | S: “I describe three kinds of deed for performing bad deeds: | T: “Three are the actions that I describe for the making of evil kamma, the production of evil kamma:
mn56:4.7 | S: physical deeds, verbal deeds, and mental deeds.” | T: bodily action, verbal action, & mental action.”
mn56:4.8 | S: “But are these kinds of deed all distinct from each other?” | T: “And is bodily action one thing, verbal action another, and mental action still another?”
mn56:4.9 | S: “Yes, each is quite distinct.” | T: “Bodily action is one thing, verbal action another, and mental action still another.”
mn56:4.10 | S: “Of the three deeds thus analyzed and differentiated, which deed do you describe as being the most blameworthy for performing bad deeds: physical deeds, verbal deeds, or mental deeds?” | T: “And of these three actions—thus analyzed, thus differentiated, friend Gotama—which action do you describe as the most greatly blameworthy for the making of evil kamma, the production of evil kamma: bodily action, verbal action, or mental action?”
mn56:4.11 | S: “I describe mental deeds as being the most blameworthy for performing bad deeds, not so much physical deeds or verbal deeds.” | T: “Of these three rods—thus analyzed, thus differentiated, Dīgha Tapassin—I describe mental action as the most greatly blameworthy for the making of evil kamma, the production of evil kamma, not so much bodily action, not so much verbal action.”
mn56:4.12 | S: “Do you say mental deeds, Reverend Gotama?” | T: “Do you say, ‘mental action,’ friend Gotama?”
mn56:4.13 | S: “I say mental deeds, Tapassī.” | T: “I say, ‘mental action,’ Dīgha Tapassin.”
mn56:4.14 | S: “Do you say mental deeds, Reverend Gotama?” | T: “Do you say, ‘mental action,’ friend Gotama?”
mn56:4.15 | S: “I say mental deeds, Tapassī.” | T: “I say, ‘mental action,’ Dīgha Tapassin.”
mn56:4.16 | S: “Do you say mental deeds, Reverend Gotama?” | T: “Do you say, ‘mental action,’ friend Gotama?”
mn56:4.17 | S: “I say mental deeds, Tapassī.” | T: “I say, ‘mental action,’ Dīgha Tapassin.”
mn56:4.18 | S: Thus the Jain ascetic Dīgha Tapassī made the Buddha stand by this point up to the third time, after which he rose from his seat and went to see the Jain Ñātika. | T: Having thus gotten the Blessed One to assert his position up to three times, Dīgha Tapassin got up from his seat and went to the Nigaṇṭha Nāṭaputta.
mn56:5.1 | S: Now at that time the Jain Ñātika was sitting together with a large assembly of Bālaki laypeople headed by Upāli. | T: Now, on that occasion the Nigaṇṭha Nāṭaputta was sitting with a large lay following from Bālaka headed by Upāli.
mn56:5.2 | S: The Jain Ñātika saw Dīgha Tapassī coming off in the distance | T: He saw Dīgha Tapassin the Nigaṇṭha coming from afar,
mn56:5.3 | S: and said to him, | T: and on seeing him, said,
mn56:5.4 | S: “So, Tapassī, where are you coming from in the middle of the day?” | T: “Where are you coming from, Tapassin, in the middle of the day?”
mn56:5.5 | S: “Just now, sir, I’ve come from the presence of the ascetic Gotama.” | T: “I am coming, lord, from the presence of Gotama the contemplative.”
mn56:5.6 | S: “But did you have some discussion with him?” | T: “And did you have any discussion with Gotama the contemplative?”
mn56:5.7 | S: “I did.” | T: “I did have some discussion with Gotama the contemplative.”
mn56:5.8 | S: “And what kind of discussion did you have with him?” | T: “And how did your discussion with Gotama the contemplative go?”
mn56:5.9 | S: Then Dīgha Tapassī informed the Jain Ñātika of all they had discussed. | T: Then Dīgha Tapassin the Nigaṇṭha told the Nigaṇṭha Nāṭaputta the entire extent of his discussion with the Blessed One.
mn56:6.1 | S: When he had spoken, the Jain Ñātika said to him, | T: When this was said, the Nigaṇṭha Nāṭaputta said to Dīgha Tapassin the Nigaṇṭha,
mn56:6.2 | S: “Good, good, Tapassī! | T: “That was good, very good Tapassin.
mn56:6.3 | S: The Jain ascetic Dīgha Tapassī has answered the ascetic Gotama like a learned disciple who rightly understands their teacher’s instructions. | T: The way an instructed disciple would rightly understand the message of the Teacher is how Dīgha Tapassin the Nigaṇṭha answered Gotama the contemplative.
mn56:6.4 | S: For how significant is the measly mental rod when compared with the solid physical rod? | T: For what does the trivial mental rod count for in comparison with the gross bodily rod?
mn56:6.5 | S: Rather, the physical rod is the most blameworthy for performing bad deeds, not so much the verbal rod or the mental rod.” | T: On the contrary, the bodily rod is most greatly blameworthy for the doing of evil kamma, for the production of evil kamma, not so much the verbal rod, not so much the mental rod.”
mn56:7.1 | S: When he said this, the householder Upāli said to him, | T: When this was said, Upāli the householder said to the Nigaṇṭha Nāṭaputta,
mn56:7.2 | S: “Good, sir! Well done, Dīgha Tapassī! | T: “That was good, lord, very good of Tapassin.
mn56:7.3 | S: The Honorable Tapassī has answered the ascetic Gotama like a learned disciple who rightly understands their teacher’s instructions. | T: The way an instructed disciple would rightly understand the message of the Teacher is how Dīgha Tapassin the Nigaṇṭha answered Gotama the contemplative.
mn56:7.4 | S: For how significant is the measly mental rod when compared with the solid physical rod? | T: For what does the trivial mental rod count for in comparison with the gross bodily rod?
mn56:7.5 | S: Rather, the physical rod is the most blameworthy for performing bad deeds, not so much the verbal rod or the mental rod. | T: On the contrary, the bodily rod is the most greatly blameworthy for the doing of evil kamma, for the production of evil kamma, not so much the verbal rod, not so much the mental rod.
mn56:7.6 | S: I’d better go and refute the ascetic Gotama’s doctrine regarding this point. | T: “So then, lord, I am going. I will overthrow Gotama the contemplative’s teaching on the grounds of this position.
mn56:7.7 | S: If he stands by the position that he stated to Dīgha Tapassī, I’ll take him on in debate and drag him to and fro and round about, like a strong man would grab a fleecy sheep and drag it to and fro and round about! | T: If he asserts in my presence what Ven. Tapassin got him to assert, then just as a strong man, seizing a long-haired ram by the hair, would drag him to and drag him fro and drag him all around, in the same way I, statement by statement, will drag Gotama the contemplative to and drag him fro and drag him all around.
mn56:7.8 | S: Taking him on in debate, I’ll drag him to and fro and round about, like a strong brewer’s worker would toss a large brewer’s sieve into a deep lake, grab it by the corners, and drag it to and fro and round about! | T: Just as a strong distillery worker, throwing a large distiller’s strainer into a deep water tank and grabbing it by the corners, would drag it to and drag it fro and drag it all around, in the same way I, statement by statement, will drag Gotama the contemplative to and drag him fro and drag him all around.
mn56:7.9 | S: Taking him on in debate, I’ll shake him down and about and give him a beating, like a strong brewer’s mixer would grab a strainer by the corners and shake it down and about, and give it a beating! | T: Just as a strong distillery ruffian, grabbing a horse-hair strainer by the corners, would shake it down and shake it out and thump it, in the same way I, statement by statement, will shake Gotama the contemplative down and shake him out and thump him.
mn56:7.10 | S: I’ll play a game of hemp-washing with the ascetic Gotama, like a sixty-year-old elephant would plunge into a deep lotus pond and play a game of hemp-washing! | T: Just as a sixty-year old elephant, plunging into a deep pond, would amuse itself playing the game of hemp-washing, in the same way I will amuse myself playing the game of hemp-washing Gotama the contemplative, as it were.
mn56:7.11 | S: Sir, I’d better go and refute the ascetic Gotama’s doctrine on this point.” | T: So then, lord, I am going. I will overthrow Gotama the contemplative’s teaching on the grounds of this position.”
mn56:7.12 | S: “Go, householder, refute the ascetic Gotama’s doctrine on this point. | T: “Go, householder, and refute Gotama the contemplative’s teaching on the grounds of this position.
mn56:7.13 | S: For either I should do so, or Dīgha Tapassī, or you.” | T: For either I or Dīgha Tapassin or you could refute his teaching.”
mn56:8.1 | S: When he said this, Dīgha Tapassī said to the Jain Ñātika, | T: When this was said, Dīgha Tapassin the Nigaṇṭha said to the Nigaṇṭha Nāṭaputta,
mn56:8.2 | S: “Sir, I don’t believe it’s a good idea for the householder Upāli to rebut the ascetic Gotama’s doctrine. | T: “It doesn’t seem right to me, lord, that Upāli the householder should [try to] overthrow Gotama the contemplative’s teaching,
mn56:8.3 | S: For the ascetic Gotama is deceitful. He knows a conversion trick, and uses it to convert the disciples of other religions.” | T: because Gotama the contemplative is a magician, and he knows a converting magic by which he converts the disciples of other sects.”
mn56:8.4 | S: “It is impossible, Tapassī, it cannot happen that Upāli could become Gotama’s disciple. | T: “It’s impossible, Tapassin, it could not happen, that Upāli the householder would enter into discipleship under Gotama the contemplative.
mn56:8.5 | S: But it is possible that Gotama could become Upāli’s disciple. | T: But there is the possibility that Gotama the contemplative would enter into discipleship under Upāli the householder.
mn56:8.6 | S: Go, householder, refute the ascetic Gotama’s doctrine on this point. | T: Go, householder, and refute Gotama the contemplative’s teaching on the grounds of this position.
mn56:8.7 | S: For either I should do so, or Dīgha Tapassī, or you.” | T: For either I or Dīgha Tapassin or you could refute his teaching.”
mn56:9.1 | S: For a second time … | T: A second time…
mn56:9.2 | S: and a third time, Dīgha Tapassī said to the Jain Ñātika, | T: A third time, Dīgha Tapassin the Nigaṇṭha said to the Nigaṇṭha Nāṭaputta,
mn56:9.3 | S: “Sir, I don’t believe it’s a good idea for the householder Upāli to rebut the ascetic Gotama’s doctrine. | T: “It doesn’t seem right to me, lord, that Upāli the householder should [try to] overthrow Gotama the contemplative’s teaching,
mn56:9.4 | S: For the ascetic Gotama is deceitful. He knows a conversion trick, and uses it to convert the disciples of other religions.” | T: because Gotama the contemplative is a magician, and he knows a converting magic by which he converts the disciples of other sects.”
mn56:9.5 | S: “It is impossible, Tapassī, it cannot happen that Upāli could become Gotama’s disciple. | T: “It’s impossible, Tapassin, it could not happen, that Upāli the householder would enter into discipleship under Gotama the contemplative.
mn56:9.6 | S: But it is possible that Gotama could become Upāli’s disciple. | T: But there is the possibility that Gotama the contemplative would enter into discipleship under Upāli the householder.
mn56:9.7 | S: Go, householder, refute the ascetic Gotama’s doctrine on this point. | T: Go, householder, and refute Gotama the contemplative’s teaching on the grounds of this position.
mn56:9.8 | S: For either I should do so, or Dīgha Tapassī, or you.” | T: For either I or Dīgha Tapassin or you could refute his teaching.”
mn56:9.9 | S: “Yes, sir,” replied the householder Upāli to the Jain Ñātika. He rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled him, keeping him on his right. Then he went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, | T: Having responded, “As you say, lord,” to the Nigaṇṭha Nāṭaputta, Upāli the householder got up from his seat, bowed down to him, and—keeping him on his right—went to the Blessed One in Pāvarika’s mango grove. On arrival, he bowed down to the Blessed One and sat to one side. As he was sitting there, he said to the Blessed One,
mn56:9.10 | S: “Sir, did the Jain ascetic Dīgha Tapassī come here?” | T: “Lord, did Dīgha Tapassin the Nigaṇṭha come here?”
mn56:9.11 | S: “He did, householder.” | T: “Yes, householder, Dīgha Tapassin the Nigaṇṭha came here.”
mn56:9.12 | S: “But did you have some discussion with him?” | T: “And did you have any discussion with him?”
mn56:9.13 | S: “I did.” | T: “I had some discussion with him.”
mn56:9.14 | S: “And what kind of discussion did you have with him?” | T: “And how did your discussion with him go?”
mn56:9.15 | S: Then the Buddha informed Upāli of all they had discussed. | T: Then the Blessed One related the entire extent of his discussion with Dīgha Tapassin the Nigaṇṭha.
mn56:10.1 | S: When he said this, the householder Upāli said to him, | T: When this was said, Upāli the householder said to the Blessed One,
mn56:10.2 | S: “Good, sir, well done by Tapassī! | T: “That was good, very good of Tapassin.
mn56:10.3 | S: The Jain ascetic Dīgha Tapassī has answered the ascetic Gotama like a learned disciple who rightly understands their teacher’s instructions. | T: The way an instructed disciple would rightly understand the message of the Teacher is how Dīgha Tapassin the Nigaṇṭha answered the Blessed One.
mn56:10.4 | S: For how impressive is the measly mental rod when compared with the solid physical rod? | T: For what does the trivial mental rod count for in comparison with the gross bodily rod?
mn56:10.5 | S: Rather, the physical rod is the most blameworthy for performing bad deeds, not so much the verbal rod or the mental rod.” | T: On the contrary, the bodily rod is the most greatly blameworthy for the doing of evil kamma, for the production of evil kamma, not so much the verbal rod, not so much the mental rod.”
mn56:10.6 | S: “Householder, so long as you debate on the basis of truth, we can have some discussion about this.” | T: “If, householder, you will confer taking a stand on the truth, we might have some discussion here.”
mn56:10.7 | S: “I will debate on the basis of truth, sir. | T: “Lord, I will confer taking a stand on the truth.
mn56:10.8 | S: Let us have some discussion about this.” | T: Let us have some discussion here.”
mn56:11.1 | S: “What do you think, householder? | T: “What do you think, householder?
mn56:11.2 | S: Take a Jain ascetic who is sick, suffering, gravely ill. They turn down cold water and use only hot water. | T: There might be the case where a Nigaṇṭha is diseased, pained, severely ill, refusing cold water and taking warm water.
mn56:11.3 | S: Not getting cold water, they might die. | T: He, not getting cold water, would die.
mn56:11.4 | S: Now, where does the Jain Ñātika say they would be reborn?” | T: Where would the Nigaṇṭha Nāṭaputta describe his reappearance?”
mn56:11.5 | S: “Sir, there are gods called ‘mind-bound’. They would be reborn there. | T: “Lord, there are the devas called Attached-in-Mind. He reappears there.
mn56:11.6 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn56:11.7 | S: Because they died with mental attachment.” | T: He is bound in mind when he dies.”
mn56:11.8 | S: “Think about it, householder! You should think before answering. | T: “Householder, householder, pay attention, and answer (only) after having paid attention!
mn56:11.9 | S: What you said before and what you said after don’t match up. | T: What you said after isn’t consistent with what you said before, nor is what you said before consistent with what you said after.
mn56:11.10 | S: But you said that you would debate on the basis of truth.” | T: And yet you made this statement:
mn56:11.11 | P: ‘sacce ahaṁ, bhante, patiṭṭhāya mantessāmi, | T: ‘Lord, I will confer taking a stand on the truth.
mn56:11.12 | P: hotu no ettha kathāsallāpo’”ti. | T: Let us have some discussion here.’”
mn56:11.13 | S: “Even though the Buddha says this, still the physical rod is the most blameworthy for performing bad deeds, not so much the verbal rod or the mental rod.” | T: “Lord, even though the Blessed One says that, still the bodily rod is the most greatly blameworthy for the doing of evil kamma, for the production of evil kamma, not so much the verbal rod, not so much the mental rod.”
mn56:12.1 | S: “What do you think, householder? | T: “What do you think, householder?
mn56:12.2 | S: Take a Jain ascetic who is restrained in the fourfold constraint, is restrained in all that is to be restrained, is bridled in all that is to be restrained, has shaken off evil in all that is to be restrained, and is curbed in all that is to be restrained. | T: There might be the case where a Nigaṇṭha is restrained with the fourfold restraint: constrained by all constraints, yoked to all constraints, cleansed by all constraints, attained to all constraints.
mn56:12.3 | S: When going out and coming back they injure many little creatures. | T: As he walks back & forth, he brings many small beings to destruction.
mn56:12.4 | S: Now, what result does the Jain Ñātika say they would incur?” | T: What (kammic) result would the Nigaṇṭha Nāṭaputta describe for him?”
mn56:12.5 | S: “Sir, the Jain Ñātika says that unintentional acts are not very blameworthy.” | T: “What is unintended, lord, the Nigaṇṭha Nāṭaputta does not describe as greatly blameworthy.”
mn56:12.6 | S: “But if they are intentional?” | T: “But if he intends it?”
mn56:12.7 | S: “Then they are very blameworthy.” | T: “Greatly blameworthy, lord.”
mn56:12.8 | S: “But where does the Jain Ñātika say that intention is classified?” | T: “And under what does Nigaṇṭha Nāṭaputta classify intention?”
mn56:12.9 | S: “In the mental rod, sir.” | T: “Under the mental rod, lord.”
mn56:12.10 | S: “Think about it, householder! You should think before answering. | T: “Householder, householder, pay attention, and answer (only) after having paid attention!
mn56:12.11 | S: What you said before and what you said after don’t match up. | T: What you said after isn’t consistent with what you said before, nor is what you said before consistent with what you said after.
mn56:12.12 | S: But you said that you would debate on the basis of truth.” | T: And yet you made this statement:
mn56:12.13 | P: ‘sacce ahaṁ, bhante, patiṭṭhāya mantessāmi; | T: ‘Lord, I will confer taking a stand on the truth.
mn56:12.14 | P: hotu no ettha kathāsallāpo’”ti. | T: Let us have some discussion here.’”
mn56:12.15 | S: “Even though the Buddha says this, still the physical rod is the most blameworthy for performing bad deeds, not so much the verbal rod or the mental rod.” | T: “Lord, even though the Blessed One says that, still the bodily rod is more greatly reprehensible for the doing of evil kamma, for the production of evil kamma, not so much the verbal rod, not so much the mental rod.”
mn56:13.1 | S: “What do you think, householder? | T: “What do you think, householder?
mn56:13.2 | S: Is this Nāḷandā successful and prosperous, populous and full of people?” | T: Is this Nālandā powerful & rich, populous & crowded with people?”
mn56:13.3 | S: “Indeed it is, sir.” | T: “Yes, lord.”
mn56:13.4 | S: “What do you think, householder? | T: “What do you think?
mn56:13.5 | S: Suppose a man were to come along with a drawn sword | T: There is the case where a man might come with uplifted sword.
mn56:13.6 | S: and say: | T: He would say,
mn56:13.7 | S: ‘In one hour I will reduce all the living creatures within the bounds of Nāḷandā to one heap and mass of flesh!’ | T: ‘In a single moment, in a single instant, I will turn whatever beings there are in this Nālandā into a single pile of flesh, a single heap of flesh.’
mn56:13.8 | S: What do you think, householder? | T: What do you think?
mn56:13.9 | S: Could he do that?” | T: Would that man be able—in a single moment, in a single instant—to turn whatever beings there are in this Nālandā into a single pile of flesh, a single heap of flesh?”
mn56:13.10 | S: “Sir, even ten, twenty, thirty, forty, or fifty men couldn’t do that. | T: “Lord, not even ten men, twenty men, thirty men, forty men, fifty men would be able—in a single moment, in a single instant—to turn whatever beings there are in this Nālandā into a single pile of flesh, a single heap of flesh.
mn56:13.11 | S: How impressive is one measly man?” | T: So what would one trivial man count for?”
mn56:13.12 | S: “What do you think, householder? | T: “What do you think, householder?
mn56:13.13 | S: Suppose an ascetic or brahmin with psychic power, who has achieved mastery of the mind, were to come along | T: There is the case where a contemplative or brahman with supernormal power, attained to mastery of mind, might come.
mn56:13.14 | S: and say: | T: He would say,
mn56:13.15 | S: ‘I will reduce Nāḷandā to ashes with a single malevolent act of will!’ | T: ‘With a single mental act of hatred, I will turn this Nālandā to ash.’
mn56:13.16 | S: What do you think, householder? | T: What do you think?
mn56:13.17 | S: Could he do that?” | T: Would that contemplative or brahman with supernormal power, attained to mastery of mind, be able—with a single mental act of hatred—to turn this Nālandā to ash?”
mn56:13.18 | S: “Sir, an ascetic or brahmin with psychic power, who has achieved mastery of the mind, could reduce ten, twenty, thirty, forty, or fifty Nāḷandās to ashes with a single malevolent act of will. | T: “Lord, with a single mental act of hatred he would be able to turn even ten Nālandās, twenty Nālandās, thirty Nālandās, forty Nālandās, fifty Nālandās to ash.
mn56:13.19 | S: How significant is one measly Nāḷandā?” | T: So what would one trivial Nālandā count for?”
mn56:13.20 | S: “Think about it, householder! You should think before answering. | T: “Householder, householder, pay attention, and answer (only) after having paid attention!
mn56:13.21 | S: What you said before and what you said after don’t match up. | T: What you said after isn’t consistent with what you said before, nor is what you said before consistent with what you said after.
mn56:13.22 | S: But you said that you would debate on the basis of truth.” | T: And yet you made this statement:
mn56:13.23 | P: ‘sacce ahaṁ, bhante, patiṭṭhāya mantessāmi; | T: ‘Lord, I will confer taking a stand on the truth.
mn56:13.24 | P: hotu no ettha kathāsallāpo’”ti. | T: Let us have some discussion here.’”
mn56:13.25 | S: “Even though the Buddha says this, still the physical rod is the most blameworthy for performing bad deeds, not so much the verbal rod or the mental rod.” | T: “Lord, even though the Blessed One says that, still the bodily rod is more greatly blameworthy for the doing of evil kamma, for the production of evil kamma, not so much the verbal rod, not so much the mental rod.”
mn56:13.26 | S: “What do you think, householder? | T: “What do you think, householder?
mn56:13.27 | S: Have you heard how the wildernesses of Daṇḍaka, Kaliṅga, Mejjha, and Mātaṅga came to be that way?” | T: Have you heard how the Daṇḍakī wilderness, the Kāliṅga wilderness, the Mejjha wilderness, & the Mātaṅga wilderness became wildernesses?”
mn56:13.28 | S: “I have, sir.” | T: “Yes, lord, I have….”
mn56:14.1 | S: “What have you heard?” | T: “What do you think, householder? From what you have heard, how did the Daṇḍakī wilderness, the Kāliṅga wilderness, the Mejjha wilderness, & the Mātaṅga wilderness become wildernesses?”
mn56:14.2 | S: “I heard that it was because of a malevolent act of will by seers that the wildernesses of Daṇḍaka, Kaliṅga, Mejjha, and Mātaṅga came to be that way.” | T: “Lord, I have heard that it was through a mental act of hatred on the part of seers that the Daṇḍakī wilderness, the Kāliṅga wilderness, the Mejjha wilderness, & the Mātaṅga wilderness became wildernesses.”
mn56:14.3 | S: “Think about it, householder! You should think before answering. | T: “Householder, householder, pay attention, and answer (only) after having paid attention!
mn56:14.4 | S: What you said before and what you said after don’t match up. | T: What you said after isn’t consistent with what you said before, nor is what you said before consistent with what you said after.
mn56:14.5 | S: But you said that you would debate on the basis of truth.” | T: And yet you made this statement:
mn56:14.6 | P: ‘sacce ahaṁ, bhante, patiṭṭhāya mantessāmi; | T: ‘Lord, I will confer taking a stand on the truth.
mn56:14.7 | P: hotu no ettha kathāsallāpo’”ti. | T: Let us have some discussion here.’”
mn56:15.1 | S: “Sir, I was already delighted and satisfied by the Buddha’s very first simile. | T: “Lord, I was gratified and won over by the Blessed One’s very first simile.
mn56:15.2 | S: Nevertheless, I wanted to hear the Buddha’s various solutions to the problem, so I thought I’d oppose you in this way. | T: But wanting to hear these very artful ways of handling questions from the Blessed One, I thought I should treat him as an opponent.
mn56:15.3 | S: Excellent, sir! Excellent! | T: Magnificent, lord! Magnificent!
mn56:15.4 | S: As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, the Buddha has made the teaching clear in many ways. | T: Just as if he were to place upright what was overturned, to reveal what was hidden, to show the way to one who was lost, or to carry a lamp into the dark so that those with eyes could see forms, in the same way has the Blessed One—through many lines of reasoning—made the Dhamma clear.
mn56:15.5 | S: I go for refuge to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. | T: I go to the Blessed One for refuge, to the Dhamma, and to the Saṅgha of monks.
mn56:15.6 | S: From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” | T: May the Blessed One remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge, from this day forward, for life.”
mn56:16.1 | S: “Householder, you should act after careful consideration. It’s good for well-known people such as yourself to act after careful consideration.” | T: “Make a careful scrutiny, householder. It is good for well-known people like you to be careful scrutinizers.”
mn56:16.2 | S: “Now I’m even more delighted and satisfied with the Buddha, since he tells me to act after careful consideration. | T: “That, lord, has me to an ever greater extent gratified & pleased with the Blessed One, that he says to me, ‘Make a careful scrutiny, householder. It is good for well-known people like you to be careful scrutinizers.’
mn56:16.3 | S: For if the followers of other religions were to gain me as a disciple, they’d carry a banner all over Nāḷandā, saying: | T: For other sectarians, on gaining me as a disciple, would carry a banner all around Nālanda [announcing],
mn56:16.4 | S: ‘The householder Upāli has become our disciple!’ | T: ‘Upāli the householder has entered into discipleship under us.’
mn56:16.5 | S: And yet the Buddha says: | T: Yet on the contrary, the Blessed One says to me,
mn56:16.6 | S: ‘Householder, you should act after careful consideration. It’s good for well-known people such as yourself to act after careful consideration.’ | T: ‘Make a careful scrutiny, householder. It is good for well-known people like you to be careful scrutinizers.’
mn56:16.7 | S: For a second time, I go for refuge to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. | T: For a second time, lord, I go to the Blessed One for refuge, to the Dhamma, and to the Saṅgha of monks.
mn56:16.8 | S: From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” | T: May the Blessed One remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge, from this day forward, for life.”
mn56:17.1 | S: “For a long time now, householder, your family has been a well-spring of support for the Jain ascetics. You should consider giving to them when they come.” | T: “Householder, your family compound has long been like a waterhole for the Nigaṇṭhas, and you should consider that almsfood should be given to them when they come to it.”
mn56:17.2 | S: “Now I’m even more delighted and satisfied with the Buddha, since he tells me to consider giving to the Jain ascetics when they come. | T: “That, lord, has me to an ever greater extent gratified & pleased with the Blessed One, that he says to me, ‘Householder, your family compound has long been like a waterhole for the Nigaṇṭhas, and you should consider that almsfood should be given to them when they come to it.’
mn56:17.3 | S: I have heard, sir, that the ascetic Gotama says this: | T: I have heard it said, lord, that ‘Gotama the contemplative says,
mn56:17.4 | S: ‘Gifts should only be given to me, not to others. | T: “A gift should be given only to me, and not to others.
mn56:17.5 | S: Gifts should only be given to my disciples, not to the disciples of others. | T: A gift should be given only to my disciples, and not to the disciples of others.
mn56:17.6 | S: Only what is given to me is very fruitful, not what is given to others. | T: What is given only to me bears great fruit, not what is given to others.
mn56:17.7 | S: Only what is given to my disciples is very fruitful, not what is given to the disciples of others.’ | T: What is given only to my disciples bears great fruit, not what is given to the disciples of others.”’
mn56:17.8 | S: Yet the Buddha encourages me to give to the Jain ascetics. | T: Yet on the contrary, the Blessed One encourages me to give gifts to the Nigaṇṭhas.
mn56:17.9 | S: Well, sir, we’ll know the proper time for that. | T: But at any rate, lord, I will know the time for that.
mn56:17.10 | S: For a third time, I go for refuge to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. | T: For a third time, lord, I go to the Blessed One for refuge, to the Dhamma, and to the Saṅgha of monks.
mn56:17.11 | S: From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” | T: May the Blessed One remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge, from this day forward, for life.”
mn56:18.1 | S: Then the Buddha taught the householder Upāli step by step, with | T: Then the Blessed One gave a graduated talk to Upāli the householder, i.e.,
mn56:18.2 | S: a talk on giving, ethical conduct, and heaven. He revealed the drawbacks of sensual pleasures, so sordid and corrupt, and the benefit of renunciation. | T: a talk on giving, a talk on virtue, a talk on heaven; he proclaimed the drawbacks of, degradation in, & defilement in sensuality, and the rewards of renunciation.
mn56:18.3 | S: And when he knew that Upāli’s mind was ready, pliable, rid of hindrances, elated, and confident he revealed the special teaching of the Buddhas: | T: Then—when he knew that Upāli the householder was of ready mind, malleable mind, unhindered mind, exultant mind, confident mind—he proclaimed to him the distinctive teaching of the Awakened Ones:
mn56:18.4 | S: suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. | T: stress, origination, cessation, path.
mn56:18.5 | S: Just as a clean cloth rid of stains would properly absorb dye, | T: Just as a white cloth with stains removed would rightly take dye,
mn56:18.6 | S: in that very seat the stainless, immaculate vision of the Dhamma arose in Upāli: | T: in the same way there arose to Upāli the householder, in that very seat, the dustless, stainless Dhamma eye:
mn56:18.7 | S: “Everything that is liable to arise is liable to cease.” | T: Whatever is subject to origination is all subject to cessation.
mn56:18.8 | S: Then Upāli saw, attained, understood, and fathomed the Dhamma. He went beyond doubt, got rid of indecision, and became self-assured and independent of others regarding the Teacher’s instructions. | T: Then—having seen the Dhamma, having reached the Dhamma, known the Dhamma, gained a footing in the Dhamma, having crossed over & beyond doubt, having had no more questioning—Upāli the householder gained fearlessness and was independent of others with regard to the Teacher’s message.
mn56:18.9 | S: He said to the Buddha, “Well, now, sir, I must go. I have many duties, and much to do.” | T: Then Upāli the householder said to the Blessed One, “Now, lord, I must go. Many are my duties, many my responsibilities.”
mn56:18.10 | S: “Please, householder, go at your convenience.” | T: “Then do, householder, what you consider it is now time to do.”
mn56:19.1 | S: And then the householder Upāli approved and agreed with what the Buddha said. He got up from his seat, bowed and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right. Then he went back to his own home, where he addressed the gatekeeper, | T: Then Upāli the householder, delighting in & approving of the Blessed One’s words, got up from his seat, bowed down to him, and—keeping him on his right—went to his own home. On arrival, he said to the gatekeeper,
mn56:19.2 | S: “My good gatekeeper, from this day forth close the gate to Jain monks and nuns, and open it for the Buddha’s monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen. | T: “From this day forth, my good gatekeeper, I close the door to male & female Nigaṇṭhas and leave the door unclosed to the Blessed One’s monks, nuns, male lay followers, & female lay followers.
