## mn22, continued
mn22:47.3 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: That is what the Blessed One said.
mn22:47.4 | S: Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said. | T: The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
mn22:47.5 | P: Alagaddūpamasuttaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ dutiyaṁ. | T: (none)

## mn46
mn46:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
mn46:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
mn46:1.3 | S: There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, | T: There he addressed the bhikkhus thus:
mn46:1.4 | S: “Mendicants!” | T: “Bhikkhus.”—
mn46:1.5 | S: “Venerable sir,” they replied. | T: “Venerable sir,” they replied.
mn46:1.6 | S: The Buddha said this: | T: The Blessed One said this:
mn46:2.1 | S: “Mendicants, sentient beings typically have the wish, desire, and hope: | T: “Bhikkhus, for the most part beings have this wish, desire, and longing:
mn46:2.2 | S: ‘Oh, if only unlikable, undesirable, and disagreeable things would decrease, and likable, desirable, and agreeable things would increase!’ | T: ‘If only unwished for, undesired, disagreeable things would diminish and wished for, desired, agreeable things would increase!’
mn46:2.3 | S: But exactly the opposite happens to them. | T: Yet although beings have this wish, desire, and longing, unwished for, undesired, disagreeable things increase for them and wished for, desired, agreeable things diminish.
mn46:2.4 | S: What do you take to be the reason for this?” | T: Now, bhikkhus, what do you think is the reason for that?”
mn46:2.5 | S: “Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge. Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The mendicants will listen and remember it.” | T: “Venerable sir, our teachings are rooted in the Blessed One, guided by the Blessed One, have the Blessed One as their resort. It would be good if the Blessed One would explain the meaning of these words. Having heard it from the Blessed One, the bhikkhus will remember it.”
mn46:2.6 | S: “Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.” | T: “Then listen, bhikkhus, and attend closely to what I shall say.”
mn46:2.7 | S: “Yes, sir,” they replied. | T: “Yes, venerable sir,” they replied.
mn46:2.8 | S: The Buddha said this: | T: The Blessed One said this:
mn46:3.1 | S: “Take an unlearned ordinary person who has not seen the noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve not seen true persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the true persons. | T: “Here, bhikkhus, an untaught ordinary person who has no regard for noble ones and is unskilled and undisciplined in their Dhamma, who has no regard for true men and is unskilled and undisciplined in their Dhamma,
mn46:3.2 | S: They don’t know what practices they should cultivate and foster, and what practices they shouldn’t cultivate and foster. | T: does not know what things should be cultivated and what things should not be cultivated, he does not know what things should be followed and what things should not be followed.
mn46:3.3 | S: So they cultivate and foster practices they shouldn’t, and don’t cultivate and foster practices they should. | T: Not knowing this, he cultivates things that should not be cultivated and does not cultivate things that should be cultivated, he follows things that should not be followed and does not follow things that should be followed.
mn46:3.4 | S: When they do so, unlikable, undesirable, and disagreeable things increase, and likable, desirable, and agreeable things decrease. | T: It is because he does this that unwished for, undesired, disagreeable things increase for him and wished for, desired, agreeable things diminish.
mn46:3.5 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn46:3.6 | S: Because that’s what it’s like for the ignorant. | T: That is what happens to one who does not see.
mn46:4.1 | S: But a learned noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve seen true persons, and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the true persons. | T: “The well-taught noble disciple who has regard for noble ones and is skilled and disciplined in their Dhamma, who has regard for true men and is skilled and disciplined in their Dhamma,
mn46:4.2 | S: They know what practices they should cultivate and foster, and what practices they shouldn’t cultivate and foster. | T: knows what things should be cultivated and what things should not be cultivated, he knows what things should be followed and what things should not be followed.
mn46:4.3 | S: So they cultivate and foster practices they should, and don’t cultivate and foster practices they shouldn’t. | T: Knowing this, he cultivates things that should be cultivated and does not cultivate things that should not be cultivated, he follows things that should be followed and does not follow things that should not be followed.
mn46:4.4 | S: When they do so, unlikable, undesirable, and disagreeable things decrease, and likable, desirable, and agreeable things increase. | T: It is because he does this that unwished for, undesired, disagreeable things diminish for him and wished for, desired, agreeable things increase.
mn46:4.5 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn46:4.6 | S: Because that’s what it’s like for the knowledgable. | T: That is what happens to one who sees.
mn46:5.1 | S: Mendicants, there are these four ways of taking up practices. | T: “Bhikkhus, there are four ways of undertaking things.
mn46:5.2 | S: What four? | T: What are the four?
mn46:5.3 | S: There is a way of taking up practices that is painful now and results in future pain. | T: There is a way of undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the future as pain.
mn46:5.4 | S: There is a way of taking up practices that is pleasant now but results in future pain. | T: There is a way of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pain.
mn46:5.5 | S: There is a way of taking up practices that is painful now but results in future pleasure. | T: There is a way of undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the future as pleasure.
mn46:5.6 | S: There is a way of taking up practices that is pleasant now and results in future pleasure. | T: There is a way of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pleasure.
mn46:6.1 | S: When it comes to the way of taking up practices that is painful now and results in future pain, an ignoramus, without knowing this, doesn’t truly understand: | T: The Ignorant Person (1) “Now, bhikkhus, one who is ignorant, not knowing this way of undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the future as pain, does not understand it as it actually is thus:
mn46:6.2 | S: ‘This is the way of taking up practices that is painful now and results in future pain.’ | T: ‘This way of undertaking things is painful now and ripens in the future as pain.’
mn46:6.3 | S: So instead of avoiding that practice, they cultivate it. | T: Not knowing it, not understanding it as it actually is, the ignorant one cultivates it and does not avoid it;
mn46:6.4 | S: When they do so, unlikable, undesirable, and disagreeable things increase, and likable, desirable, and agreeable things decrease. | T: because he does so, unwished for, undesired, disagreeable things increase for him and wished for, desired, agreeable things diminish.
mn46:6.5 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn46:6.6 | S: Because that’s what it’s like for the ignorant. | T: That is what happens to one who does not see.
mn46:7.1 | S: When it comes to the way of taking up practices that is pleasant now and results in future pain, an ignoramus … | T: (2) “Now, bhikkhus, one who is ignorant, not knowing this way of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pain, does not understand it as it actually is thus:
mn46:7.2 | P: ‘idaṁ kho dhammasamādānaṁ paccuppannasukhaṁ āyatiṁ dukkhavipākan’ti. | T: ‘This way of undertaking things is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pain.’
mn46:7.3 | S: cultivates it … | T: Not knowing it, not understanding it as it actually is, the ignorant one cultivates it and does not avoid it;
mn46:7.4 | S: and disagreeable things increase … | T: because he does so, unwished for…things increase for him and wished for…things diminish.
mn46:7.5 | P: Taṁ kissa hetu? | T: Why is that?
mn46:7.6 | P: Evañhetaṁ, bhikkhave, hoti yathā taṁ aviddasuno. | T: That is what happens to one who does not see.
mn46:8.1 | S: When it comes to the way of taking up practices that is painful now and results in future pleasure, an ignoramus … | T: (3) “Now, bhikkhus, one who is ignorant, not knowing this way of undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the future as pleasure, does not understand it as it actually is thus:
mn46:8.2 | P: ‘idaṁ kho dhammasamādānaṁ paccuppannadukkhaṁ āyatiṁ sukhavipākan’ti. | T: ‘This way of undertaking things is painful now and ripens in the future as pleasure.’
mn46:8.3 | S: doesn’t cultivate it … | T: Not knowing it, not understanding it as it actually is, the ignorant one does not cultivate it but avoids it;
mn46:8.4 | S: and disagreeable things increase … | T: because he does so, unwished for…things increase for him and wished for…things diminish.
mn46:8.5 | P: Taṁ kissa hetu? | T: Why is that?
mn46:8.6 | P: Evañhetaṁ, bhikkhave, hoti yathā taṁ aviddasuno. | T: That is what happens to one who does not see.
mn46:9.1 | S: When it comes to the way of taking up practices that is pleasant now and results in future pleasure, an ignoramus … | T: (4) “Now, bhikkhus, one who is ignorant, not knowing the way of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pleasure, does not understand it as it actually is thus:
mn46:9.2 | P: ‘idaṁ kho dhammasamādānaṁ paccuppannasukhañceva āyatiñca sukhavipākan’ti. | T: ‘This way of undertaking things is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pleasure.’
mn46:9.3 | S: doesn’t cultivate it … | T: Not knowing it, not understanding it as it actually is, the ignorant one does not cultivate it but avoids it;
mn46:9.4 | S: and disagreeable things increase … | T: because he does so, unwished for…things increase for him and wished for…things diminish.
mn46:9.5 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn46:9.6 | S: Because that’s what it’s like for the ignorant. | T: That is what happens to one who does not see.
mn46:10.1 | S: When it comes to the way of taking up practices that is painful now and results in future pain, a wise person, knowing this, truly understands: | T: The Wise Person (1) “Now, bhikkhus, one who is wise, knowing this way of undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the future as pain, understands it as it actually is thus:
mn46:10.2 | S: ‘This is the way of taking up practices that is painful now and results in future pain.’ | T: ‘This way of undertaking things is painful now and ripens in the future as pain.’
mn46:10.3 | S: So instead of cultivating that practice, they avoid it. | T: Knowing it, understanding it as it actually is, the wise one does not cultivate it but avoids it;
mn46:10.4 | S: When they do so, unlikable, undesirable, and disagreeable things decrease, and likable, desirable, and agreeable things increase. | T: because he does so, unwished for, undesired, disagreeable things diminish for him and wished for, desired, agreeable things increase.
mn46:10.5 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn46:10.6 | S: Because that’s what it’s like for the knowledgable. | T: That is what happens to one who sees.
mn46:11.1 | S: When it comes to the way of taking up practices that is pleasant now and results in future pain, a wise person … | T: (2) “Now, bhikkhus, one who is wise, knowing this way of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pain, understands it as it actually is thus:
mn46:11.2 | P: ‘idaṁ kho dhammasamādānaṁ paccuppannasukhaṁ āyatiṁ dukkhavipākan’ti. | T: ‘This way of undertaking things is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pain.’
mn46:11.3 | S: doesn’t cultivate it … | T: Knowing it, understanding it as it actually is, the wise one does not cultivate it but avoids it;
mn46:11.4 | S: and agreeable things increase … | T: because he does so, unwished for…things diminish for him and wished for…things increase.
mn46:11.5 | P: Taṁ kissa hetu? | T: Why is that?
mn46:11.6 | P: Evañhetaṁ, bhikkhave, hoti yathā taṁ viddasuno. | T: That is what happens to one who sees.
mn46:12.1 | S: When it comes to the way of taking up practices that is painful now and results in future pleasure, a wise person … | T: (3) “Now, bhikkhus, one who is wise, knowing this way of undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the future as pleasure, understands it as it actually is thus:
mn46:12.2 | P: ‘idaṁ kho dhammasamādānaṁ paccuppannadukkhaṁ āyatiṁ sukhavipākan’ti. | T: ‘This way of undertaking things is painful now and ripens in the future as pleasure.’
mn46:12.3 | S: cultivates it … | T: Knowing it, understanding it as it actually is, the wise one does not avoid it but cultivates it;
mn46:12.4 | S: and agreeable things increase … | T: because he does so, unwished for things…diminish for him and wished for…things increase.
mn46:12.5 | P: Taṁ kissa hetu? | T: Why is that?
mn46:12.6 | P: Evañhetaṁ, bhikkhave, hoti yathā taṁ viddasuno. | T: That is what happens to one who sees.
mn46:13.1 | S: When it comes to the way of taking up practices that is pleasant now and results in future pleasure, a wise person, knowing this, truly understands: | T: (4) “Now, bhikkhus, one who is wise, knowing this way of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pleasure, understands it as it actually is thus:
mn46:13.2 | S: ‘This is the way of taking up practices that is pleasant now and results in future pleasure.’ | T: ‘This way of undertaking things is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pleasure.’
mn46:13.3 | S: So instead of avoiding that practice, they cultivate it. | T: Knowing it, understanding it as it actually is, the wise one does not avoid it but cultivates it;
mn46:13.4 | S: When they do so, unlikable, undesirable, and disagreeable things decrease, and likable, desirable, and agreeable things increase. | T: because he does so, unwished for…things diminish for him and wished for…things increase.
mn46:13.5 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn46:13.6 | S: Because that’s what it’s like for the knowledgable. | T: That is what happens to one who sees.
mn46:14.1 | S: And what is the way of taking up practices that is painful now and results in future pain? | T: The Four Ways (1) “What, bhikkhus, is the way of undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the future as pain?
mn46:14.2 | S: It’s when someone in pain and sadness kills living creatures, steals, and commits sexual misconduct. They use speech that’s false, backbiting, harsh, or nonsensical. And they’re covetous, malicious, with wrong view. Because of these things they experience pain and sadness. | T: Here, bhikkhus, someone in pain and grief kills living beings, and he experiences pain and grief that have killing of living beings as condition.
mn46:14.3 | P: sahāpi dukkhena sahāpi domanassena adinnādāyī hoti, adinnādānapaccayā ca dukkhaṁ domanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: In pain and grief he takes what is not given…
mn46:14.4 | P: sahāpi dukkhena sahāpi domanassena kāmesu micchācārī hoti, kāmesu micchācārapaccayā ca dukkhaṁ domanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: misconducts himself in sensual pleasures…
mn46:14.5 | P: sahāpi dukkhena sahāpi domanassena musāvādī hoti, musāvādapaccayā ca dukkhaṁ domanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: speaks falsehood…
mn46:14.6 | P: sahāpi dukkhena sahāpi domanassena pisuṇavāco hoti, pisuṇavācāpaccayā ca dukkhaṁ domanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: speaks maliciously…
mn46:14.7 | P: sahāpi dukkhena sahāpi domanassena pharusavāco hoti, pharusavācāpaccayā ca dukkhaṁ domanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: speaks harshly…
mn46:14.8 | P: sahāpi dukkhena sahāpi domanassena samphappalāpī hoti, samphappalāpapaccayā ca dukkhaṁ domanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: gossips…
mn46:14.9 | P: sahāpi dukkhena sahāpi domanassena abhijjhālu hoti, abhijjhāpaccayā ca dukkhaṁ domanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: is covetous…
mn46:14.10 | P: sahāpi dukkhena sahāpi domanassena byāpannacitto hoti, byāpādapaccayā ca dukkhaṁ domanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: has a mind of ill will…
mn46:14.11 | P: sahāpi dukkhena sahāpi domanassena micchādiṭṭhi hoti, micchādiṭṭhipaccayā ca dukkhaṁ domanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti. | T: holds wrong view, and he experiences pain and grief that have wrong view as condition.
mn46:14.12 | S: And when their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: On the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.
mn46:14.13 | S: This is called the way of taking up practices that is painful now and results in future pain. | T: This is called the way of undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the future as pain.
mn46:15.1 | S: And what is the way of taking up practices that is pleasant now but results in future pain? | T: (2) “What, bhikkhus, is the way of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pain?
mn46:15.2 | S: It’s when someone with pleasure and happiness kills living creatures, steals, and commits sexual misconduct. They use speech that’s false, backbiting, harsh, or nonsensical. And they’re covetous, malicious, with wrong view. Because of these things they experience pleasure and happiness. | T: Here, bhikkhus, someone in pleasure and joy kills living beings, and he experiences pleasure and joy that have killing of living beings as condition.
mn46:15.3 | P: sahāpi sukhena sahāpi somanassena adinnādāyī hoti, adinnādānapaccayā ca sukhaṁ somanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: In pleasure and joy he takes what is not given…
mn46:15.4 | P: sahāpi sukhena sahāpi somanassena kāmesumicchācārī hoti, kāmesumicchācārapaccayā ca sukhaṁ somanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: (none)
mn46:15.5 | P: sahāpi sukhena sahāpi somanassena musāvādī hoti, musāvādapaccayā ca sukhaṁ somanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: (none)
mn46:15.6 | P: sahāpi sukhena sahāpi somanassena pisuṇavāco hoti, pisuṇavācāpaccayā ca sukhaṁ somanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: (none)
mn46:15.7 | P: sahāpi sukhena sahāpi somanassena pharusavāco hoti, pharusavācāpaccayā ca sukhaṁ somanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: (none)
mn46:15.8 | P: sahāpi sukhena sahāpi somanassena samphappalāpī hoti, samphappalāpapaccayā ca sukhaṁ somanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: (none)
mn46:15.9 | P: sahāpi sukhena sahāpi somanassena abhijjhālu hoti, abhijjhāpaccayā ca sukhaṁ somanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: (none)
mn46:15.10 | P: sahāpi sukhena sahāpi somanassena byāpannacitto hoti, byāpādapaccayā ca sukhaṁ somanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: (none)
mn46:15.11 | P: sahāpi sukhena sahāpi somanassena micchādiṭṭhi hoti, micchādiṭṭhipaccayā ca sukhaṁ somanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti. | T: …holds wrong view, and he experiences pleasure and joy that have wrong view as condition.
mn46:15.12 | S: But when their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: On the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.
mn46:15.13 | S: This is called the way of taking up practices that is pleasant now but results in future pain. | T: This is called the way of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pain.
mn46:16.1 | S: And what is the way of taking up practices that is painful now but results in future pleasure? | T: (3) “What, bhikkhus, is the way of undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the future as pleasure?
mn46:16.2 | S: It’s when someone in pain and sadness doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They don’t use speech that’s false, backbiting, harsh, or nonsensical. And they’re contented, kind-hearted, with right view. Because of these things they experience pain and sadness. | T: Here, bhikkhus, someone in pain and grief abstains from killing living beings, and he experiences pain and grief that have abstention from killing living beings as condition.
mn46:16.3 | P: sahāpi dukkhena sahāpi domanassena adinnādānā paṭivirato hoti, adinnādānā veramaṇīpaccayā ca dukkhaṁ domanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: In pain and grief he abstains from taking what is not given…
mn46:16.4 | P: sahāpi dukkhena sahāpi domanassena kāmesumicchācārā paṭivirato hoti, kāmesumicchācārā veramaṇīpaccayā ca dukkhaṁ domanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: from misconduct in sensual pleasures…
mn46:16.5 | P: sahāpi dukkhena sahāpi domanassena musāvādā paṭivirato hoti, musāvādā veramaṇīpaccayā ca dukkhaṁ domanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: from speaking falsehood…
mn46:16.6 | P: sahāpi dukkhena sahāpi domanassena pisuṇāya vācāya paṭivirato hoti, pisuṇāya vācāya veramaṇīpaccayā ca dukkhaṁ domanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: from speaking maliciously…
mn46:16.7 | P: sahāpi dukkhena sahāpi domanassena pharusāya vācāya paṭivirato hoti, pharusāya vācāya veramaṇīpaccayā ca dukkhaṁ domanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: from speaking harshly…
mn46:16.8 | P: sahāpi dukkhena sahāpi domanassena samphappalāpā paṭivirato hoti, samphappalāpā veramaṇīpaccayā ca dukkhaṁ domanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: from gossiping…
mn46:16.9 | P: sahāpi dukkhena sahāpi domanassena anabhijjhālu hoti, anabhijjhāpaccayā ca dukkhaṁ domanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: he is not covetous…
mn46:16.10 | P: sahāpi dukkhena sahāpi domanassena abyāpannacitto hoti, abyāpādapaccayā ca dukkhaṁ domanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: he does not have a mind of ill will…
mn46:16.11 | P: sahāpi dukkhena sahāpi domanassena sammādiṭṭhi hoti, sammādiṭṭhipaccayā ca dukkhaṁ domanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti. | T: …he holds right view, and he experiences pain and grief that have right view as condition.
mn46:16.12 | S: But when their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. | T: On the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.
mn46:16.13 | S: This is called the way of taking up practices that is painful now but results in future pleasure. | T: This is called the way of undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the future as pleasure.
mn46:17.1 | S: And what is the way of taking up practices that is pleasant now and results in future pleasure? | T: (4) “What, bhikkhus, is the way of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pleasure?
mn46:17.2 | S: It’s when someone with pleasure and happiness doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They don’t use speech that’s false, backbiting, harsh, or nonsensical. And they’re contented, kind-hearted, with right view. Because of these things they experience pleasure and happiness. | T: Here, bhikkhus, someone in pleasure and joy abstains from killing living beings, and he experiences pleasure and joy that have abstention from killing living beings as condition.
mn46:17.3 | P: sahāpi sukhena sahāpi somanassena adinnādānā paṭivirato hoti, adinnādānā veramaṇīpaccayā ca sukhaṁ somanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: In pleasure and joy he abstains from taking what is not given…
mn46:17.4 | P: sahāpi sukhena sahāpi somanassena kāmesumicchācārā paṭivirato hoti, kāmesumicchācārā veramaṇīpaccayā ca sukhaṁ somanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: (none)
mn46:17.5 | P: sahāpi sukhena sahāpi somanassena musāvādā paṭivirato hoti, musāvādā veramaṇīpaccayā ca sukhaṁ somanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: (none)
mn46:17.6 | P: sahāpi sukhena sahāpi somanassena pisuṇāya vācāya paṭivirato hoti, pisuṇāya vācāya veramaṇīpaccayā ca sukhaṁ somanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: (none)
mn46:17.7 | P: sahāpi sukhena sahāpi somanassena pharusāya vācāya paṭivirato hoti, pharusāya vācāya veramaṇīpaccayā ca sukhaṁ somanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: (none)
mn46:17.8 | P: sahāpi sukhena sahāpi somanassena samphappalāpā paṭivirato hoti, samphappalāpā veramaṇīpaccayā ca sukhaṁ somanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: (none)
mn46:17.9 | P: sahāpi sukhena sahāpi somanassena anabhijjhālu hoti, anabhijjhāpaccayā ca sukhaṁ somanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: (none)
mn46:17.10 | P: sahāpi sukhena sahāpi somanassena abyāpannacitto hoti, abyāpādapaccayā ca sukhaṁ somanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti; | T: (none)
mn46:17.11 | P: sahāpi sukhena sahāpi somanassena sammādiṭṭhi hoti, sammādiṭṭhipaccayā ca sukhaṁ somanassaṁ paṭisaṁvedeti. | T: he holds right view, and he experiences pleasure and joy that have right view as condition.
mn46:17.12 | S: And when their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. | T: On the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.
mn46:17.13 | S: This is called the way of taking up practices that is pleasant now and results in future pleasure. | T: This is called the way of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pleasure.
mn46:17.14 | S: These are the four ways of taking up practices. | T: (none)
mn46:18.1 | S: Suppose there was some bitter gourd mixed with poison. | T: The Similes (1) “Bhikkhus, suppose there were a bitter gourd mixed with poison,
mn46:18.2 | S: Then a man would come along who wants to live and doesn’t want to die, who wants to be happy and recoils from pain. | T: and a man came who wanted to live, not to die, who wanted pleasure and recoiled from pain,
mn46:18.3 | S: They’d say to him: | T: and they told him:
mn46:18.4 | S: ‘Here, my man, this is bitter gourd mixed with poison. | T: ‘Good man, this bitter gourd is mixed with poison.
mn46:18.5 | S: Drink it if you like. | T: Drink from it if you want;
mn46:18.6 | S: If you drink it, the color, aroma, and flavor will be unappetizing, and it will result in death or deadly pain.’ | T: as you drink from it, its colour, smell, and taste will not agree with you, and after drinking from it, you will come to death or deadly suffering.’
mn46:18.7 | S: He wouldn’t put it down. Without appraisal, he’d drink it. | T: Then he drank from it without reflecting and did not relinquish it.
mn46:18.8 | S: The color, aroma, and flavor would be unappetizing, and it would result in death or deadly pain. | T: As he drank from it, its colour, smell, and taste did not agree with him, and after drinking from it, he came to death or deadly suffering.
mn46:18.9 | S: This is comparable to the way of taking up practices that is painful now and results in future pain, I say. | T: Similar to that, I say, is the way of undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the future as pain.
mn46:19.1 | S: Suppose there was a bronze goblet of beverage that had a nice color, aroma, and flavor. | T: (2) “Suppose there were a bronze cup of beverage possessing a good colour, smell, and taste,
mn46:19.2 | S: But it was mixed with poison. | T: but it was mixed with poison,
mn46:19.3 | S: Then a man would come along who wants to live and doesn’t want to die, who wants to be happy and recoils from pain. | T: and a man came who wanted to live, not to die, who wanted pleasure and recoiled from pain,
mn46:19.4 | S: They’d say to him: | T: and they told him:
mn46:19.5 | S: ‘Here, my man, this bronze goblet of beverage has a nice color, aroma, and flavor. | T: ‘Good man, this bronze cup of beverage possesses a good colour, smell, and taste,
mn46:19.6 | S: But it’s mixed with poison. | T: but it is mixed with poison.
mn46:19.7 | S: Drink it if you like. | T: Drink from it if you want;
mn46:19.8 | S: If you drink it, the color, aroma, and flavor will be appetizing, but it will result in death or deadly pain.’ | T: as you drink from it, its colour, smell, and taste will agree with you, but after drinking from it, you will come to death or deadly suffering.’
mn46:19.9 | S: He wouldn’t put it down. Without appraisal, he’d drink it. | T: Then he drank from it without reflecting and did not relinquish it.
mn46:19.10 | S: The color, aroma, and flavor would be appetizing, but it would result in death or deadly pain. | T: As he drank from it, its colour, smell, and taste agreed with him, but after drinking from it, he came to death or deadly suffering.
mn46:19.11 | S: This is comparable to the way of taking up practices that is pleasant now and results in future pain, I say. | T: Similar to that, I say, is the way of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pain.
mn46:20.1 | S: Suppose there was some rancid urine mixed with different medicines. | T: (3) “Suppose there were fermented urine mixed with various medicines,
mn46:20.2 | S: Then a man with jaundice would come along. | T: and a man came sick with jaundice,
mn46:20.3 | S: They’d say to him: | T: and they told him:
mn46:20.4 | S: ‘Here, my man, this is rancid urine mixed with different medicines. Drink it if you like. | T: ‘Good man, this fermented urine is mixed with various medicines. Drink from it if you want;
mn46:20.5 | S: If you drink it, the color, aroma, and flavor will be unappetizing, but after drinking it you will be happy.’ | T: as you drink from it, its colour, smell, and taste will not agree with you, but after drinking from it, you will be well.’
mn46:20.6 | S: He wouldn’t put it down. After appraisal, he’d drink it. | T: Then he drank from it after reflecting, and did not relinquish it.
mn46:20.7 | S: The color, aroma, and flavor would be unappetizing, but after drinking it he would be happy. | T: As he drank from it, its colour, taste, and smell did not agree with him, but after drinking from it, he became well.
mn46:20.8 | S: This is comparable to the way of taking up practices that is painful now and results in future pleasure, I say. | T: Similar to that, I say, is the way of undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the future as pleasure.
mn46:21.1 | S: Suppose there was some curds, honey, ghee, and molasses all mixed together. | T: (4) “Suppose there were curd, honey, ghee, and molasses mixed together,
mn46:21.2 | S: Then a man with bloody dysentery would come along. | T: and a man with dysentery came,
mn46:21.3 | S: They’d say to him: | T: and they told him:
mn46:21.4 | S: ‘Here, my man, this is curds, honey, ghee, and molasses all mixed together. Drink it if you like. | T: ‘Good man, this is curd, honey, ghee, and molasses mixed together. Drink from it if you want;
mn46:21.5 | S: If you drink it, the color, aroma, and flavor will be appetizing, and after drinking it you will be happy.’ | T: as you drink from it, its colour, smell, and taste will agree with you, and after drinking from it you will be well.’
mn46:21.6 | S: He wouldn’t put it down. After appraisal, he’d drink it. | T: Then he drank from it after reflecting, and did not relinquish it.
mn46:21.7 | S: The color, aroma, and flavor would be appetizing, and after drinking it he would be happy. | T: As he drank from it, its colour, smell, and taste agreed with him, and after drinking from it, he became well.
mn46:21.8 | S: This is comparable to the way of taking up practices that is pleasant now and results in future pleasure, I say. | T: Similar to that, I say, is the way of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pleasure.
mn46:22.1 | S: It’s like the last month of the rainy season, in autumn, when the heavens are sunny and cloudless. And as the sun is rising to the firmament, having dispelled all the darkness of space, it shines and glows and dazzles. | T: “Just as, in autumn, in the last month of the rainy season, when the sky is clear and cloudless, the sun rises above the earth dispelling all darkness from space with its shining and beaming and radiance,
mn46:22.2 | S: In the same way, this way of taking up practices that is pleasant now and results in future pleasure dispels the doctrines of the various other ascetics and brahmins as it shines and glows and dazzles.” | T: so too, the way of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pleasure dispels with its shining and beaming and radiance any other doctrines whatsoever of ordinary recluses and brahmins.”
mn46:22.3 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: That is what the Blessed One said.
mn46:22.4 | S: Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said. | T: The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
mn46:22.5 | P: Mahādhammasamādānasuttaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ chaṭṭhaṁ. | T: (none)

## mn41
mn41:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
mn41:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he arrived at a village of the Kosalan brahmins named Sālā. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering by stages in the Kosalan Country with a large Sangha of bhikkhus, and eventually he arrived at a Kosalan brahmin village named Sālā.
mn41:2.1 | S: The brahmins and householders of Sālā heard, | T: The brahmin householders of Sālā heard:
mn41:2.2 | S: “It seems the ascetic Gotama—a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family—while wandering in the land of the Kosalans has arrived at Sālā, together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants. | T: “The recluse Gotama, the son of the Sakyans who went forth from a Sakyan clan, has been wandering in the Kosalan country with a large Sangha of bhikkhus and has come to Sālā.
mn41:2.3 | S: He has this good reputation: | T: Now a good report of Master Gotama has been spread to this effect:
mn41:2.4 | S: ‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ | T: ‘That Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened, blessed.
mn41:2.5 | S: He has realized with his own insight this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—and he makes it known to others. | T: He declares this world with its gods, its Māras, and its Brahmās, this generation with its recluses and brahmins, its princes and its people, which he has himself realised with direct knowledge.
mn41:2.6 | S: He teaches Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. | T: He teaches the Dhamma good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing,
mn41:2.7 | S: He reveals an entirely full and pure spiritual life. | T: and he reveals a holy life that is utterly perfect and pure.’
mn41:2.8 | S: It’s good to see such perfected ones.” | T: Now it is good to see such arahants.”
mn41:3.1 | S: Then the brahmins and householders of Sālā went up to the Buddha. Before sitting down to one side, some bowed, some exchanged greetings and polite conversation, some held up their cupped palms toward the Buddha, some announced their name and clan, while some kept silent. Seated to one side they said to the Buddha: | T: Then the brahmin householders of Sālā went to the Blessed One. Some paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down at one side; some exchanged greetings with him, and when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, sat down at one side; some extended their hands in reverential salutation towards the Blessed One and sat down at one side; some pronounced their name and clan in the Blessed One’s presence and sat down at one side; some kept silent and sat down at one side. When they were seated, they said to the Blessed One:
mn41:4.1 | S: “What is the cause, worthy Gotama, what is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell? | T: “Master Gotama, what is the cause and condition why some beings here, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in states of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell?
mn41:4.2 | S: And what is the cause, worthy Gotama, what is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm?” | T: And what is the cause and condition why some beings here, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world?”
mn41:5.1 | S: “Unprincipled and immoral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: “Householders, it is by reason of conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, by reason of unrighteous conduct that some beings here, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in states of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.
mn41:5.2 | S: Principled and moral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.” | T: It is by reason of conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, by reason of righteous conduct that some beings here, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.”
mn41:6.1 | S: “We don’t understand the detailed meaning of the worthy Gotama’s brief statement. | T: “We do not understand the detailed meaning of Master Gotama’s utterance, which he has spoken in brief without expounding the detailed meaning.
mn41:6.2 | S: Worthy Gotama, please teach us this matter in detail so we can understand the meaning.” | T: It would be good if Master Gotama would teach us the Dhamma so that we might understand the detailed meaning of his utterance.”
mn41:6.3 | S: “Well then, householders, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.” | T: “Then, householders, listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”
mn41:6.4 | S: “Yes, worthy sir,” they replied. | T: “Yes, venerable sir,” they replied.
mn41:6.5 | S: The Buddha said this: | T: The Blessed One said this:
mn41:7.1 | S: “Householders, unprincipled and immoral conduct is threefold by way of body, fourfold by way of speech, and threefold by way of mind. | T: “Householders, there are three kinds of bodily conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct. There are four kinds of verbal conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct. There are three kinds of mental conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct.
mn41:8.1 | S: And how is unprincipled and immoral conduct threefold by way of body? | T: “And how, householders, are there three kinds of bodily conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct?
mn41:8.2 | S: It’s when someone kills living creatures. They’re violent, bloody-handed, a hardened killer, merciless to living beings. | T: Here someone kills living beings; he is murderous, bloody-handed, given to blows and violence, merciless to living beings.
mn41:8.3 | S: They steal. With the intention to commit theft, they take the wealth or belongings of others from village or wilderness. | T: He takes what is not given; he takes by way of theft the wealth and property of others in the village or forest.
mn41:8.4 | S: They commit sexual misconduct. They have relations with women who have their mother, father, both mother and father, brother, sister, relatives, or clan as guardian. They have relations with a woman who is protected on principle, or who has a husband, or whose violation is punishable by law, or even one who has been garlanded as a token of betrothal. | T: He misconducts himself in sensual pleasures; he has intercourse with women who are protected by their mother, father, mother and father, brother, sister, or relatives, who have a husband, who are protected by law, and even with those who are garlanded in token of betrothal.
mn41:8.5 | S: This is how unprincipled and immoral conduct is threefold by way of body. | T: That is how there are three kinds of bodily conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct.
mn41:9.1 | S: And how is unprincipled and immoral conduct fourfold by way of speech? | T: “And how, householders, are there four kinds of verbal conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct?
mn41:9.2 | S: It’s when someone lies. They’re summoned to a council, an assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to bear witness: ‘Please, my friend, say what you know.’ Not knowing, they say ‘I know.’ Knowing, they say ‘I don’t know.’ Not seeing, they say ‘I see.’ And seeing, they say ‘I don’t see.’ So they deliberately lie for the sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly reason. | T: Here someone speaks falsehood; when summoned to a court, or to a meeting, or to his relatives’ presence, or to his guild, or to the royal family’s presence, and questioned as a witness thus: ‘So, good man, tell what you know,’ not knowing, he says, ‘I know,’ or knowing, he says, ‘I do not know’; not seeing, he says, ‘I see,’ or seeing, he says, ‘I do not see’; in full awareness he speaks falsehood for his own ends, or for another’s ends, or for some trifling worldly end.
mn41:9.3 | S: They backbite. They repeat in one place what they heard in another so as to divide people against each other. And so they divide those who are harmonious, supporting division, delighting in division, loving division, speaking words that promote division. | T: He speaks maliciously; he repeats elsewhere what he has heard here in order to divide those people from these, or he repeats to these people what he has heard elsewhere in order to divide these people from those; thus he is one who divides those who are united, a creator of divisions, who enjoys discord, rejoices in discord, delights in discord, a speaker of words that create discord.
mn41:9.4 | S: They speak harshly. They use the kinds of words that are cruel, nasty, hurtful, offensive, bordering on anger, not leading to immersion. | T: He speaks harshly; he utters such words as are rough, hard, hurtful to others, offensive to others, bordering on anger, unconducive to concentration.
mn41:9.5 | S: They talk nonsense. Their speech is untimely, and is neither factual nor beneficial. It has nothing to do with the teaching or the training. Their words have no value, and are untimely, unreasonable, rambling, and pointless. | T: He is a gossip; he speaks at the wrong time, speaks what is not fact, speaks what is useless, speaks contrary to the Dhamma and the Discipline; at the wrong time he speaks such words as are worthless, unreasonable, immoderate, and unbeneficial.
mn41:9.6 | S: This is how unprincipled and immoral conduct is fourfold by way of speech. | T: That is how there are four kinds of verbal conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct.
mn41:10.1 | S: And how is unprincipled and immoral conduct threefold by way of mind? | T: “And how, householders, are there three kinds of mental conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct?
mn41:10.2 | S: It’s when someone is covetous. They covet the wealth and belongings of others: ‘Oh, if only their belongings were mine!’ | T: Here someone is covetous; he covets the wealth and property of others thus: ‘Oh, may what belongs to another be mine!’
mn41:10.3 | S: They have ill will and malicious intentions: ‘May these sentient beings be killed, slaughtered, slain, destroyed, or annihilated!’ | T: Or he has a mind of ill will and intentions of hate thus: ‘May these beings be slain and slaughtered, may they be cut off, perish, or be annihilated!’
mn41:10.4 | S: They have wrong view. Their perspective is distorted: | T: Or he has wrong view, distorted vision, thus:
mn41:10.5 | S: ‘There’s no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There’s no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There’s no afterlife. There’s no such thing as mother and father, or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there’s no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ | T: ‘There is nothing given, nothing offered, nothing sacrificed; no fruit or result of good and bad actions; no this world, no other world; no mother, no father; no beings who are reborn spontaneously; no good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who have themselves realised by direct knowledge and declare this world and the other world.’
mn41:10.6 | S: This is how unprincipled and immoral conduct is threefold by way of mind. | T: That is how there are three kinds of mental conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct.
mn41:10.7 | S: That’s how unprincipled and immoral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: So, householders, it is by reason of such conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, by reason of such unrighteous conduct that some beings here on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in states of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.
mn41:11.1 | S: Householders, principled and moral conduct is threefold by way of body, fourfold by way of speech, and threefold by way of mind. | T: “Householders, there are three kinds of bodily conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct. There are four kinds of verbal conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct. There are three kinds of mental conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct.
mn41:12.1 | S: And how is principled and moral conduct threefold by way of body? | T: “And how, householders, are there three kinds of bodily conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct?
mn41:12.2 | S: It’s when someone gives up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. They’re scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for all living beings. | T: Here someone, abandoning the killing of living beings, abstains from killing living beings; with rod and weapon laid aside, gentle and kindly, he abides compassionate to all living beings.
mn41:12.3 | S: They give up stealing. They don’t, with the intention to commit theft, take the wealth or belongings of others from village or wilderness. | T: Abandoning the taking of what is not given, he abstains from taking what is not given; he does not take by way of theft the wealth and property of others in the village or in the forest.
mn41:12.4 | S: They give up sexual misconduct. They don’t have relations with women who have their mother, father, both mother and father, brother, sister, relatives, or clan as guardian. They don’t have relations with a woman who is protected on principle, or who has a husband, or whose violation is punishable by law, or even one who has been garlanded as a token of betrothal. | T: Abandoning misconduct in sensual pleasures, he abstains from misconduct in sensual pleasures; he does not have intercourse with women who are protected by their mother, father, mother and father, brother, sister, or relatives, who have a husband, who are protected by law, or with those who are garlanded in token of betrothal.
mn41:12.5 | S: This is how principled and moral conduct is threefold by way of body. | T: That is how there are three kinds of bodily conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct.
mn41:13.1 | S: And how is principled and moral conduct fourfold by way of speech? | T: “And how, householders, are there four kinds of verbal conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct?
mn41:13.2 | S: It’s when someone gives up lying. They’re summoned to a council, an assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to bear witness: ‘Please, my friend, say what you know.’ Not knowing, they say ‘I don’t know.’ Knowing, they say ‘I know.’ Not seeing, they say ‘I don’t see.’ And seeing, they say ‘I see.’ So they don’t deliberately lie for the sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly reason. | T: Here someone, abandoning false speech, abstains from false speech; when summoned to a court, or to a meeting, or to his relatives’ presence, or to his guild, or to the royal family’s presence, and questioned as a witness thus: ‘So, good man, tell what you know,’ not knowing, he says, ‘I do not know,’ or knowing, he says, ‘I know’; not seeing, he says, ‘I do not see,’ or seeing, he says, ‘I see’; he does not in full awareness speak falsehood for his own ends, or for another’s ends, or for some trifling worldly end.
mn41:13.3 | S: They give up backbiting. They don’t repeat in one place what they heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead, they reconcile those who are divided and support those who are united, delighting in harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony. | T: Abandoning malicious speech, he abstains from malicious speech; he does not repeat elsewhere what he has heard here in order to divide those people from these, nor does he repeat to these people what he has heard elsewhere in order to divide these people from those; thus he is one who reunites those who are divided, a promoter of friendships, who enjoys concord, rejoices in concord, delights in concord, a speaker of words that promote concord.
mn41:13.4 | S: They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way that’s mellow, pleasing to the ear, endearing, going to the heart, polite, likable, and agreeable to the people. | T: Abandoning harsh speech, he abstains from harsh speech; he speaks such words as are gentle, pleasing to the ear, and loveable, as go to the heart, are courteous, desired by many, and agreeable to many.
mn41:13.5 | S: They give up talking nonsense. Their words are timely, true, and meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. They say things at the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial. | T: Abandoning gossip, he abstains from gossip; he speaks at the right time, speaks what is fact, speaks on what is good, speaks on the Dhamma and the Discipline; at the right time he speaks such words as are worth recording, reasonable, moderate, and beneficial.
mn41:13.6 | S: This is how principled and moral conduct is fourfold by way of speech. | T: That is how there are four kinds of verbal conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct.
mn41:14.1 | S: And how is principled and moral conduct threefold by way of mind? | T: “And how, householders, are there three kinds of mental conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct?
mn41:14.2 | S: It’s when someone is not covetous. They don’t covet the wealth and belongings of others: ‘Oh, if only their belongings were mine!’ | T: Here someone is not covetous; he does not covet the wealth and property of others thus: ‘Oh, may what belongs to another be mine!’
mn41:14.3 | S: They have a kind heart and loving intentions: ‘May these sentient beings live free of enmity and ill will, untroubled and happy!’ | T: His mind is without ill will and he has intentions free from hate thus: ‘May these beings be free from enmity, affliction and anxiety! May they live happily!’
mn41:14.4 | S: They have right view, an undistorted perspective: | T: He has right view, undistorted vision, thus:
mn41:14.5 | S: ‘There is meaning in giving, sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother and father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ | T: ‘There is what is given and what is offered and what is sacrificed; there is fruit and result of good and bad actions; there is this world and the other world; there is mother and father; there are beings who are reborn spontaneously; there are good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who have themselves realised by direct knowledge and declare this world and the other world.’
mn41:14.6 | S: This is how principled and moral conduct is threefold by way of mind. | T: That is how there are three kinds of mental conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct.
mn41:14.7 | S: This is how principled and moral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. | T: So, householders, it is by reason of such conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, by reason of such righteous conduct that some beings here, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.
mn41:15.1 | S: Someone of principled and moral conduct might wish: | T: “If, householders, one who observes conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct, should wish:
mn41:15.2 | S: ‘If only, when my body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of well-to-do aristocrats!’ | T: ‘Oh, that on the dissolution of the body, after death, I might reappear in the company of well-to-do nobles!’
mn41:15.3 | S: It’s possible that this might happen. | T: it is possible that, on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in the company of well-to-do nobles.
mn41:15.4 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn41:15.5 | S: Because they have principled and moral conduct. | T: Because he observes conduct that is in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct.
mn41:16-17.1 | S: Someone of principled and moral conduct might wish: | T: “If, householders, one who observes conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct, should wish:
mn41:16-17.2 | S: ‘If only, when my body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of well-to-do brahmins … | T: ‘Oh, that on the dissolution of the body, after death, I might reappear in the company of well-to-do brahmins!…
mn41:16-17.3 | S: well-to-do householders … | T: in the company of well-to-do householders!’
mn41:16-17.4 | P: ṭhānaṁ kho panetaṁ vijjati, yaṁ so kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā gahapatimahāsālānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjeyya. | T: it is possible that, on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in the company of well-to-do householders.
mn41:16-17.5 | P: Taṁ kissa hetu? | T: Why is that?
mn41:16-17.6 | P: Tathā hi so dhammacārī samacārī. | T: Because he observes conduct that is in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct.
mn41:18-42.1 | P: Ākaṅkheyya ce, gahapatayo, dhammacārī samacārī: | T: “If, householders, one who observes conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct, should wish:
mn41:18-42.2 | S: the gods of the four great kings … | T: ‘Oh, that on the dissolution of the body, after death, I might reappear in the company of the gods of the heaven of the Four Great Kings!…
mn41:18-42.3 | P: ṭhānaṁ kho panetaṁ vijjati, yaṁ so kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā cātumahārājikānaṁ devānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjeyya. | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.4 | P: Taṁ kissa hetu? | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.5 | P: Tathā hi so dhammacārī samacārī. | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.6 | P: Ākaṅkheyya ce, gahapatayo, dhammacārī samacārī: | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.7 | S: the gods of the thirty-three … | T: in the company of the gods of the heaven of the Thirty-three…
mn41:18-42.8 | S: the gods of Yama … | T: the Yāma gods…
mn41:18-42.9 | S: the joyful gods … | T: the gods of the Tusita heaven…
mn41:18-42.10 | S: the gods who love to create … | T: the gods who delight in creating…
mn41:18-42.11 | S: the gods who control what is created by others … | T: the gods who wield power over others’ creations…
mn41:18-42.12 | S: the gods of the Divinity’s host … | T: the gods of Brahmā’ s retinue…
mn41:18-42.13 | P: ṭhānaṁ kho panetaṁ vijjati, yaṁ so kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā brahmakāyikānaṁ devānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjeyya. | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.14 | P: Taṁ kissa hetu? | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.15 | P: Tathā hi so dhammacārī samacārī. | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.16 | P: Ākaṅkheyya ce, gahapatayo, dhammacārī samacārī: | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.17 | S: the luminous gods … | T: the gods of Radiance …
mn41:18-42.18 | P: ṭhānaṁ kho panetaṁ vijjati, yaṁ so kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā ābhānaṁ devānaṁ sahabyataṁ upapajjeyya. | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.19 | P: Taṁ kissa hetu? | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.20 | P: Tathā hi so dhammacārī samacārī. | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.21 | P: Ākaṅkheyya ce, gahapatayo, dhammacārī samacārī: | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.22 | S: the gods of limited luminosity … | T: the gods of Limited Radiance…
mn41:18-42.23 | S: the gods of limitless luminosity … | T: the gods of Immeasurable Radiance…
mn41:18-42.24 | S: the gods of sublime luminosity … | T: the gods of Streaming Radiance…
mn41:18-42.25 | S: the gods of limited beauty … | T: the gods of Glory…the gods of Limited Glory…
mn41:18-42.26 | S: the gods of limitless beauty … | T: the gods of Immeasurable Glory…
mn41:18-42.27 | S: the gods of universal beauty … | T: the gods of Refulgent Glory…
mn41:18-42.28 | S: the gods of abundant fruit … | T: the gods of Great Fruit…
mn41:18-42.29 | S: the gods of Aviha … | T: the Aviha gods…
mn41:18-42.30 | S: the gods of Atappa … | T: the Atappa gods…
mn41:18-42.31 | S: the gods fair to see … | T: the Sudassa gods…
mn41:18-42.32 | S: the fair seeing gods … | T: the Sudassī gods…
mn41:18-42.33 | S: the gods of Akaniṭṭha … | T: the Akaniṭṭha gods…
mn41:18-42.34 | S: the gods of the dimension of infinite space … | T: the gods of the base of infinite space…
mn41:18-42.35 | S: the gods of the dimension of infinite consciousness … | T: the gods of the base of infinite consciousness…
mn41:18-42.36 | S: the gods of the dimension of nothingness … | T: the gods of the base of nothingness…
mn41:18-42.37 | S: the gods of the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception.’ | T: the gods of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception!’
mn41:18-42.38 | S: It’s possible that this might happen. | T: it is possible that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in the company of the gods of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
mn41:18-42.39 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn41:18-42.40 | S: Because they have principled and moral conduct. | T: Because he observes conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct.
mn41:43.1 | S: Someone of principled and moral conduct might wish: | T: “If, householders, one who observes conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct, should wish:
mn41:43.2 | S: ‘If only I might realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, and live having realized it with my own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements.’ | T: ‘Oh, that by realising for myself with direct knowledge I might here and now enter upon and abide in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints!’
mn41:43.3 | S: It’s possible that this might happen. | T: it is possible that, by realising for himself with direct knowledge, he will here and now enter upon and abide in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints.
mn41:43.4 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn41:43.5 | S: Because they have principled and moral conduct.” | T: Because he observes conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct.”
mn41:44.1 | S: When he had spoken, the brahmins and householders of Sālā said to the Buddha, | T: When this was said, the brahmin householders of Sālā said to the Blessed One:
mn41:44.2 | S: “Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! | T: “Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent, Master Gotama!
mn41:44.3 | S: As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, worthy Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. | T: Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the darkness for those with eyesight to see forms.
