## mn31, continued
mn31:17.6 | S: going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, we enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. | T: By completely surmounting the base of nothingness, we enter upon and abide in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
mn31:17.7 | S: This is another superhuman distinction that we have achieved for going beyond and stilling that meditation.” | T: Venerable sir, this is another superhuman state…which we have attained by surmounting the preceding abiding, by making that abiding subside.”
mn31:18.1 | S: “Good, good! | T: “Good, good Anuruddha.
mn31:18.2 | S: But have you achieved any other superhuman distinction for going beyond and stilling that meditation?” | T: But is there any other superhuman state, a distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones, a comfortable abiding, which you have attained by surmounting that abiding, by making that abiding subside?”
mn31:18.3 | S: “How could we not, sir? | T: “Why not, venerable sir?
mn31:18.4 | S: Whenever we want, going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, we enter and remain in the cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, our defilements have come to an end. | T: Here, venerable sir, whenever we want, by completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, we enter upon and abide in the cessation of perception and feeling. And our taints are destroyed by our seeing with wisdom.
mn31:18.5 | S: This is another superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones, a comfortable meditation, that we have achieved for going beyond and stilling that meditation. | T: Venerable sir, this is another superhuman state, a distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones, a comfortable abiding, which we have attained by surmounting the preceding abiding, by making that abiding subside.
mn31:18.6 | S: And we don’t see any better or finer way of meditating comfortably than this.” | T: And, venerable sir, we do not see any other comfortable abiding higher or more sublime than this one.”
mn31:18.7 | S: “Good, good! | T: “Good, good Anuruddha.
mn31:18.8 | S: There is no better or finer way of meditating comfortably than this.” | T: There is no other comfortable abiding higher or more sublime than that one.”
mn31:19.1 | S: Then the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired the venerables Anuruddha, Nandiya, and Kimbila with a Dhamma talk, after which he rose from his seat and left. | T: Then, when the Blessed One had instructed, urged, roused, and gladdened the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable Nandiya, and the venerable Kimbila with a talk on the Dhamma, he rose from his seat and departed.
mn31:20.1 | S: The venerables then accompanied the Buddha for a little way before turning back. Nandiya and Kimbila said to Anuruddha, | T: After they had accompanied the Blessed One a little way and turned back again, the venerable Nandiya and the venerable Kimbila asked the venerable Anuruddha:
mn31:20.2 | S: “Did we ever tell you that we had | T: “Have we ever reported to the venerable Anuruddha
mn31:20.3 | S: gained such and such meditations and attainments, up to the ending of defilements, as you revealed to the Buddha?” | T: that we have obtained those abidings and attainments that the venerable Anuruddha, in the Blessed One’s presence, ascribed to us up to the destruction of the taints?”
mn31:20.4 | S: “The venerables did not tell me that they had | T: “The venerable ones have never reported to me
mn31:20.5 | S: gained such meditations and attainments. But I discovered it by encompassing your minds, | T: that they have obtained those abidings and attainments. Yet by encompassing the venerable ones’ minds with my own mind,
mn31:20.6 | P: ‘imāsañca imāsañca vihārasamāpattīnaṁ ime āyasmanto lābhino’ti. | T: I know that they have obtained those abidings and attainments.
mn31:20.7 | S: and deities also told me. | T: And deities have also reported to me:
mn31:20.8 | P: ‘imāsañca imāsañca vihārasamāpattīnaṁ ime āyasmanto lābhino’ti. | T: ‘These venerable ones have obtained those abidings and attainments.’
mn31:20.9 | S: I answered when the Buddha directly asked about it.” | T: Then I declared it when directly questioned by the Blessed One.”
mn31:21.1 | S: Then the native spirit Dīgha Parajana went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him, | T: Then the spirit Dīgha Parajana went to the Blessed One. After paying homage to the Blessed One, he stood at one side and said:
mn31:21.2 | S: “The Vajjis are lucky! The Vajjian people are so very lucky | T: “It is a gain for the Vajjians, venerable sir, a great gain for the Vajjian people
mn31:21.3 | S: that the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha stays there, as well as these three gentlemen, | T: that the Tathāgata, accomplished and fully enlightened, dwells among them and these three clansmen,
mn31:21.4 | S: the venerables Anuruddha, Nandiya, and Kimbila.” | T: the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable Nandiya, and the venerable Kimbila!”
mn31:21.5 | S: Hearing the cry of Dīgha Parajana, the earth gods raised the cry … | T: On hearing the exclamation of the spirit Dīgha Parajana, the earth gods exclaimed:
mn31:21.6 | P: “lābhā vata, bho, vajjīnaṁ, suladdhalābhā vajjipajāya, | T: “It is a gain for the Vajjians, a great gain for the Vajjian people
mn31:21.7 | P: yattha tathāgato viharati arahaṁ sammāsambuddho, ime ca tayo kulaputtā— | T: that the Tathāgata, accomplished and fully enlightened, dwells among them and these three clansmen,
mn31:21.8 | P: āyasmā ca anuruddho, āyasmā ca nandiyo, āyasmā ca kimilo”ti. | T: the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable Nandiya, and the venerable Kimbila!”
mn31:21.9 | S: Hearing the cry of the earth gods, the gods of the four great kings … | T: On hearing the exclamation of the earth gods, the gods of the heaven of the Four Great Kings…
mn31:21.10 | S: the gods of the thirty-three … | T: the gods of the heaven of the Thirty-three…
mn31:21.11 | S: the gods of Yama … | T: the Yāma gods…
mn31:21.12 | S: the joyful gods … | T: the gods of the Tusita heaven…
mn31:21.13 | S: the gods who love to create … | T: the gods who delight in creating…
mn31:21.14 | S: the gods who control what is created by others … | T: the gods who wield power over others’ creations…
mn31:21.15 | S: the gods of the Divinity’s host raised the cry, | T: the gods of Brahmā’s retinue exclaimed:
mn31:21.16 | S: “The Vajjis are lucky! The Vajjian people are so very lucky | T: “It is a gain for the Vajjians, a great gain for the Vajjian people
mn31:21.17 | S: that the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha stays there, as well as these three gentlemen, | T: that the Tathāgata, accomplished and fully enlightened, dwells among them and these three clansmen,
mn31:21.18 | S: the venerables Anuruddha, Nandiya, and Kimbila.” | T: the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable Nandiya, and the venerable Kimbila!”
mn31:21.19 | S: And so at that moment, that second, that hour, those venerables were known as far as the realm of divinity. | T: Thus at that instant, at that moment, those venerable ones were known as far as the Brahma-world.
mn31:22.1 | S: “That’s so true, Dīgha! That’s so true! | T: The Blessed One said: “So it is, Dīgha, so it is!
mn31:22.2 | S: If the family from which those three gentlemen went forth from the lay life to homelessness were to recollect those venerables with confident heart, that would be for that family’s lasting welfare and happiness. | T: And if the clan from which those three clansmen went forth from the home life into homelessness should remember them with confident heart, that would lead to the welfare and happiness of that clan for a long time.
mn31:22.3 | S: If the family circle … | T: And if the retinue of the clan from which those three clansmen went forth
mn31:22.4 | S: village … | T: …the village from which they went forth…
mn31:22.5 | S: town … | T: the town from which they went forth…
mn31:22.6 | S: city … | T: the city from which they went forth…
mn31:22.7 | S: country … | T: the country from which those three clansmen went forth from the home life into homelessness should remember them with confident heart, that would lead to the welfare and happiness of that country for a long time.
mn31:22.8 | S: all the aristocrats … | T: If all nobles should remember those three clansmen with confident heart, that would lead to the welfare and happiness of the nobles for a long time.
mn31:22.9 | S: all the brahmins … | T: If all brahmins…
mn31:22.10 | S: all the peasants … | T: all merchants…
mn31:22.11 | S: all the workers were to recollect those venerables with confident heart, that would be for all those menials’ lasting welfare and happiness. | T: all workers should remember those three clansmen with confident heart, that would lead to the welfare and happiness of the workers for a long time.
mn31:22.12 | S: If the whole world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—were to recollect those venerables with confident heart, that would be for the whole world’s lasting welfare and happiness. | T: If the world with its gods, its Māras, and its Brahmās, this generation with its recluses and brahmins, its princes and its people, should remember those three clansmen with confident heart, that would lead to the welfare and happiness of the world for a long time.
mn31:22.13 | S: See, Dīgha, how those three gentlemen are practicing for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans!” | T: See, Dīgha, how those three clansmen are practising for the welfare and happiness of the many, out of compassion for the world, for the good, welfare and happiness of gods and humans.”
mn31:22.14 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: That is what the Blessed One said.
mn31:22.15 | S: Satisfied, the native spirit Dīgha Parajana approved what the Buddha said. | T: The spirit Dīgha Parajana was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
mn31:22.16 | P: Cūḷagosiṅgasuttaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ paṭhamaṁ. | T: (none)

## mn12
mn12:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
mn12:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying outside the city of Vesālī in a woodland grove west of the town. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Vesālī in the grove outside the city to the west.
mn12:2.1 | S: Now at that time Sunakkhatta the Licchavi had recently left this teaching and training. | T: Now on that occasion Sunakkhatta, son of the Licchavis, had recently left this Dhamma and Discipline.
mn12:2.2 | S: He was telling a crowd in Vesālī: | T: He was making this statement before the Vesālī assembly:
mn12:2.3 | S: “The ascetic Gotama has no superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones. | T: “The recluse Gotama does not have any superhuman states, any distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.
mn12:2.4 | S: He teaches what he’s worked out by logic, following a line of inquiry, expressing his own perspective. | T: The recluse Gotama teaches a Dhamma merely hammered out by reasoning, following his own line of inquiry as it occurs to him,
mn12:2.5 | S: Regardless of his goal in teaching the Dhamma, it delivers one who applies it to the complete ending of suffering.” | T: and when he teaches the Dhamma to anyone, it leads him when he practises it to the complete destruction of suffering.”
mn12:3.1 | S: Then Venerable Sāriputta robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Vesālī for alms. | T: Then, when it was morning, the venerable Sāriputta dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Vesālī for alms.
mn12:3.2 | S: He heard what Sunakkhatta was saying. | T: Then he heard Sunakkhatta, son of the Licchavis, making this statement before the Vesālī assembly.
mn12:3.3 | P: “natthi samaṇassa gotamassa uttari manussadhammā alamariyañāṇadassanaviseso. | T: (none)
mn12:3.4 | P: Takkapariyāhataṁ samaṇo gotamo dhammaṁ deseti vīmaṁsānucaritaṁ sayampaṭibhānaṁ. | T: (none)
mn12:3.5 | P: Yassa ca khvāssa atthāya dhammo desito so niyyāti takkarassa sammā dukkhakkhayāyā”ti. | T: (none)
mn12:3.6 | S: Then he wandered for alms in Vesālī. After the meal, on his return from almsround, he went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. | T: When he had wandered for alms in Vesālī and had returned from his almsround, after his meal he went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and told the Blessed One what Sunakkhatta was saying.
mn12:3.7 | P: “sunakkhatto, bhante, licchaviputto acirapakkanto imasmā dhammavinayā. | T: (none)
mn12:3.8 | P: So vesāliyaṁ parisati evaṁ vācaṁ bhāsati: | T: (none)
mn12:3.9 | P: ‘natthi samaṇassa gotamassa uttari manussadhammā alamariyañāṇadassanaviseso. | T: (none)
mn12:3.10 | P: Takkapariyāhataṁ samaṇo gotamo dhammaṁ deseti vīmaṁsānucaritaṁ sayampaṭibhānaṁ. | T: (none)
mn12:3.11 | P: Yassa ca khvāssa atthāya dhammo desito so niyyāti takkarassa sammā dukkhakkhayāyā’”ti. | T: (none)
mn12:4.1 | S: “Sāriputta, Sunakkhatta, that futile man, is angry. | T: The Blessed One said: “Sāriputta, the misguided man Sunakkhatta is angry and his words are spoken out of anger.
mn12:4.2 | S: His words are spoken out of anger. | T: (none)
mn12:4.3 | S: Thinking he criticizes the Realized One, in fact he just praises him. | T: Thinking to discredit the Tathāgata, he actually praises him;
mn12:4.4 | S: For it is praise of the Realized One to say: | T: for it is praise of the Tathāgata to say of him:
mn12:4.5 | S: ‘Regardless of his goal in teaching the Dhamma, it delivers one who applies it to the complete ending of suffering.’ | T: ‘When he teaches the Dhamma to anyone, it leads him when he practises it to the complete destruction of suffering.’
mn12:5.1 | S: But there’s no way Sunakkhatta will infer about me from the teaching: | T: “Sāriputta, this misguided man Sunakkhatta will never infer of me according to Dhamma:
mn12:5.2 | S: ‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ | T: ‘That Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened, blessed.’
mn12:6.1 | S: And there’s no way Sunakkhatta will infer about me from the teaching: | T: “And he will never infer of me according to Dhamma:
mn12:6.2 | S: ‘That Blessed One wields the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying himself and becoming one again; materializing and dematerializing; going unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful; controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity.’ | T: ‘That Blessed One enjoys the various kinds of supernormal power: having been one, he becomes many; having been many, he becomes one; he appears and vanishes; he goes unhindered through a wall, through an enclosure, through a mountain, as though through space; he dives in and out of the earth as though it were water; he walks on water without sinking as though it were earth; seated cross-legged, he travels in space like a bird; with his hand he touches and strokes the moon and sun so powerful and mighty; he wields bodily mastery even as far as the Brahma-world.’
mn12:7.1 | S: And there’s no way Sunakkhatta will infer about me from the teaching: | T: “And he will never infer of me according to Dhamma:
mn12:7.2 | S: ‘That Blessed One, with clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, hears both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far.’ | T: ‘With the divine ear element, which is purified and surpasses the human, that Blessed One hears both kinds of sounds, the heavenly and the human, those that are far as well as near.’
mn12:8.1 | S: And there’s no way Sunakkhatta will infer about me from the teaching: | T: “And he will never infer of me according to Dhamma:
mn12:8.2 | S: ‘That Blessed One understands the minds of other beings and individuals, having encompassed them with his own mind. | T: ‘That Blessed One encompasses with his own mind the minds of other beings, other persons.
mn12:8.3 | S: He understands mind with greed as “mind with greed,” | T: He understands a mind affected by lust as affected by lust and a mind unaffected by lust as unaffected by lust;
mn12:8.4 | S: and mind without greed as “mind without greed.” | T: (none)
mn12:8.5 | S: He understands mind with hate … | T: he understands a mind affected by hate as affected by hate and a mind unaffected by hate as unaffected by hate;
mn12:8.6 | S: mind without hate … | T: (none)
mn12:8.7 | S: mind with delusion … | T: he understands a mind affected by delusion as affected by delusion and a mind unaffected by delusion as unaffected by delusion;
mn12:8.8 | S: mind without delusion … | T: (none)
mn12:8.9 | S: constricted mind … | T: he understands a contracted mind as contracted and a distracted mind as distracted;
mn12:8.10 | S: scattered mind … | T: (none)
mn12:8.11 | S: expansive mind … | T: he understands an exalted mind as exalted and an unexalted mind as unexalted;
mn12:8.12 | S: unexpansive mind … | T: (none)
mn12:8.13 | S: mind that is supreme … | T: he understands a surpassed mind as surpassed and an unsurpassed mind as unsurpassed;
mn12:8.14 | S: mind that is not supreme … | T: (none)
mn12:8.15 | S: mind immersed in samādhi … | T: he understands a concentrated mind as concentrated and an unconcentrated mind as unconcentrated;
mn12:8.16 | S: mind not immersed in samādhi … | T: (none)
mn12:8.17 | S: freed mind as “freed mind,” | T: he understands a liberated mind as liberated and an unliberated mind as unliberated.’
mn12:8.18 | S: and unfreed mind as “unfreed mind.”’ | T: (none)
mn12:9.1 | S: There are these ten powers of a Realized One that the Realized One possesses. With these he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel. | T: Ten Powers of a Tathāgata “Sāriputta, the Tathāgata has these ten Tathāgata’s powers, possessing which he claims the herd-leader’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of Brahmā.
mn12:9.2 | S: What ten? | T: What are the ten?
mn12:10.1 | S: Firstly, the Realized One truly understands the possible as possible, and the impossible as impossible. | T: (1) “Here, the Tathāgata understands as it actually is the possible as possible and the impossible as impossible.
mn12:10.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. Relying on this he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel. | T: And that is a Tathāgata’s power that the Tathāgata has, by virtue of which he claims the herd-leader’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of Brahmā.
mn12:11.1 | S: Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the result of deeds undertaken in the past, future, and present in terms of grounds and causes. | T: (2) “Again, the Tathāgata understands as it actually is the results of actions undertaken, past, future, and present, by way of possibilities and causes.
mn12:11.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … | T: That too is a Tathāgata’s power…
mn12:12.1 | S: Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands where all paths of practice lead. | T: (3) “Again, the Tathāgata understands as it actually is the ways leading to all destinations.
mn12:12.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … | T: That too is a Tathāgata’s power…
mn12:13.1 | S: Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the world with its many and diverse elements. | T: (4) “Again, the Tathāgata understands as it actually is the world with its many and different elements.
mn12:13.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … | T: That too is a Tathāgata’s power…
mn12:14.1 | S: Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the diverse convictions of sentient beings. | T: (5) “Again, the Tathāgata understands as it actually is how beings have different inclinations.
mn12:14.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … | T: That too is a Tathāgata’s power…
mn12:15.1 | S: Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the faculties of other sentient beings and other individuals after encompassing them with his mind. | T: (6) “Again, the Tathāgata understands as it actually is the disposition of the faculties of other beings, other persons.
mn12:15.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … | T: That too is a Tathāgata’s power…
mn12:16.1 | S: Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands corruption, cleansing, and emergence regarding the absorptions, liberations, immersions, and attainments. | T: (7) “Again, the Tathāgata understands as it actually is the defilement, the cleansing, and the emergence in regard to the jhānas, liberations, concentrations, and attainments.
mn12:16.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … | T: That too is a Tathāgata’s power…
mn12:17.1 | S: Furthermore, the Realized One recollects many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. He remembers: ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ And so he recollects his many kinds of past lives, with features and details. | T: (8) “Again, the Tathāgata recollects his manifold past lives, that is, one birth, two births…as MN4, §27…Thus with their aspects and particulars he recollects his manifold past lives.
mn12:17.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … | T: That too is a Tathāgata’s power…
mn12:18.1 | S: Furthermore, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, the Realized One sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. He understands how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. ‘These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’ And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, he sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. He understands how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. | T: (9) “Again, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, the Tathāgata sees beings passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate…as MN4, §29 …and he understands how beings pass on according to their actions.
mn12:18.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … | T: That too is a Tathāgata’s power…
mn12:19.1 | S: Furthermore, the Realized One has realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, and lives having realized it with his own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements. | T: (10) “Again, by realising for himself with direct knowledge, the Tathāgata here and now enters upon and abides in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints.
mn12:19.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. Relying on this he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel. | T: That too is a Tathāgata’s power that the Tathāgata has, by virtue of which he claims the herd-leader’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of Brahmā.
mn12:20.1 | S: A Realized One possesses these ten powers of a Realized One. With these he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel. | T: “The Tathāgata has these ten Tathāgata’s powers, possessing which he claims the herd-leader’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of Brahmā.
mn12:21.1 | S: When I know and see in this way, suppose someone were to say this: | T: “Sāriputta, when I know and see thus, should anyone say of me:
mn12:21.2 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has no superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones. | T: ‘The recluse Gotama does not have any superhuman states, any distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.
mn12:21.3 | S: He teaches what he’s worked out by logic, following a line of inquiry, expressing his own perspective.’ | T: The recluse Gotama teaches a Dhamma merely hammered out by reasoning, following his own line of inquiry as it occurs to him’—
mn12:21.4 | S: Unless they give up that speech and that thought, and let go of that view, they will be placed in hell as if delivered there. | T: unless he abandons that assertion and that state of mind and relinquishes that view, then as surely as if he had been carried off and put there he will wind up in hell.
mn12:21.5 | S: Just as a mendicant accomplished in ethics, immersion, and wisdom would reach enlightenment in this very life, such is the consequence, I say. | T: Just as a bhikkhu possessed of virtue, concentration, and wisdom would here and now enjoy final knowledge, so it will happen in this case, I say,
mn12:21.6 | S: Unless they give up that speech and that thought, and let go of that view, they will be placed in hell as if delivered there. | T: that unless he abandons that assertion and that state of mind and relinquishes that view, then as surely as if he had been carried off and put there he will wind up in hell.
mn12:22.1 | S: Sāriputta, a Realized One has four kinds of self-assurance. With these he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel. | T: Four Kinds of Intrepidity “Sāriputta, the Tathāgata has these four kinds of intrepidity, possessing which he claims the herd-leader’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of Brahmā.
mn12:22.2 | S: What four? | T: What are the four?
mn12:23.1 | S: I see no reason for anyone—whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or the Divinity, or anyone else in the world—to legitimately scold me, saying: ‘You claim to be a fully awakened Buddha, but you don’t understand these things.’ | T: “Here, I see no ground on which any recluse or brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or anyone else at all in the world could, in accordance with the Dhamma, accuse me thus: ‘While you claim to be fully enlightened, you are not fully enlightened about these things.’
mn12:23.2 | S: Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and self-assured. | T: And seeing no ground for that, I abide in safety, fearlessness, and intrepidity.
mn12:24.1 | S: I see no reason for anyone—whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or the Divinity, or anyone else in the world—to legitimately scold me, saying: ‘You claim to have ended all defilements, but you still have these defilements.’ | T: “I see no ground on which any recluse…or anyone at all could accuse me thus: ‘While you claim to be one who has destroyed the taints, you have not destroyed these taints.’
mn12:24.2 | S: Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and self-assured. | T: And seeing no ground for that, I abide in safety, fearlessness, and intrepidity.
mn12:25.1 | S: I see no reason for anyone—whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or the Divinity, or anyone else in the world—to legitimately scold me, saying: ‘The acts that you say are obstructions are not really obstructions for the one who performs them.’ | T: “I see no ground on which any recluse…or anyone at all could accuse me thus: ‘Those things called obstructions by you are not able to obstruct one who engages in them.’
mn12:25.2 | S: Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and self-assured. | T: And seeing no ground for that, I abide in safety, fearlessness, and intrepidity.
mn12:26.1 | S: I see no reason for anyone—whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or the Divinity, or anyone else in the world—to legitimately scold me, saying: ‘Regardless of your goal in teaching the Dhamma, it does not deliver one who applies it to the complete ending of suffering.’ | T: “I see no ground on which any recluse…or anyone at all could accuse me thus: ‘When you teach the Dhamma to someone, it does not lead him when he practises it to the complete destruction of suffering.’
mn12:26.2 | S: Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and self-assured. | T: And seeing no ground for that, I abide in safety, fearlessness, and intrepidity.
mn12:27.1 | S: A Realized One possesses these four kinds of self-assurance. With these he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel. | T: “A Tathāgata has these four kinds of intrepidity, possessing which he claims the herd-leader’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of Brahmā.
mn12:28.1 | S: When I know and see in this way, suppose someone were to say this: | T: “Sāriputta, when I know and see thus,
mn12:28.2 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has no superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones …’ | T: should anyone say of me…
mn12:28.3 | S: Unless they give up that speech and that thought, and let go of that view, they will be placed in hell as if delivered there. | T: he will wind up in hell.
mn12:28.4 | P: Seyyathāpi, sāriputta, bhikkhu sīlasampanno samādhisampanno paññāsampanno diṭṭheva dhamme aññaṁ ārādheyya, evaṁ sampadamidaṁ, sāriputta, vadāmi. | T: (none)
mn12:28.5 | P: Taṁ vācaṁ appahāya taṁ cittaṁ appahāya taṁ diṭṭhiṁ appaṭinissajjitvā yathābhataṁ nikkhitto evaṁ niraye. | T: (none)
mn12:29.1 | S: Sāriputta, there are these eight assemblies. | T: The Eight Assemblies “Sāriputta, there are these eight assemblies.
mn12:29.2 | S: What eight? | T: What are the eight?
mn12:29.3 | S: The assemblies of aristocrats, brahmins, householders, and ascetics. An assembly of the gods of the four great kings. An assembly of the gods of the thirty-three. An assembly of Māras. An assembly of divinities. | T: An assembly of nobles, an assembly of brahmins, an assembly of householders, an assembly of recluses, an assembly of gods of the heaven of the Four Great Kings, an assembly of gods of the heaven of the Thirty-three, an assembly of Māra’s retinue, an assembly of Brahmās.
mn12:29.4 | S: These are the eight assemblies. | T: (none)
mn12:29.5 | S: Possessing these four kinds of self-assurance, the Realized One approaches and enters right into these eight assemblies. | T: Possessing these four kinds of intrepidity, the Tathāgata approaches and enters these eight assemblies.
mn12:29.6 | S: I recall having approached an assembly of hundreds of aristocrats. | T: “I recall having approached many hundred assemblies of nobles…
mn12:29.7 | S: There I used to sit with them, converse, and engage in discussion. | T: (none)
mn12:29.8 | S: But I don’t see any reason to feel afraid or insecure. | T: (none)
mn12:29.9 | S: Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and self-assured. | T: (none)
mn12:30.1 | S: I recall having approached an assembly of hundreds of brahmins … | T: many hundred assemblies of brahmins…
mn12:30.2 | S: householders … | T: many hundred assemblies of householders…
mn12:30.3 | S: ascetics … | T: many hundred assemblies of recluses…
mn12:30.4 | S: the gods of the four great kings … | T: many hundred assemblies of gods of the heaven of the Four Great Kings…
mn12:30.5 | S: the gods of the thirty-three … | T: many hundred assemblies of gods of the heaven of the Thirty-three…
mn12:30.6 | S: Māras … | T: many hundred assemblies of Māra’s retinue…
mn12:30.7 | S: divinities. | T: many hundred assemblies of Brahmās.
mn12:30.8 | S: There too I used to sit with them, converse, and engage in discussion. | T: And formerly I had sat with them there and talked with them and held conversations with them,
mn12:30.9 | S: But I don’t see any reason to feel afraid or insecure. | T: yet I see no ground for thinking that fear or timidity might come upon me there.
mn12:30.10 | S: Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and self-assured. | T: And seeing no ground for that, I abide in safety, fearlessness, and intrepidity.
mn12:31.1 | S: When I know and see in this way, suppose someone were to say this: | T: “Sāriputta, when I know and see thus,
mn12:31.2 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has no superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones …’ | T: should anyone say of me…
mn12:31.3 | S: Unless they give up that speech and that thought, and let go of that view, they will be placed in hell as if delivered there. | T: he will wind up in hell.
mn12:31.4 | P: Seyyathāpi, sāriputta, bhikkhu sīlasampanno samādhisampanno paññāsampanno diṭṭheva dhamme aññaṁ ārādheyya, evaṁ sampadamidaṁ, sāriputta, vadāmi. | T: (none)
mn12:31.5 | P: Taṁ vācaṁ appahāya taṁ cittaṁ appahāya taṁ diṭṭhiṁ appaṭinissajjitvā yathābhataṁ nikkhitto evaṁ niraye. | T: (none)
mn12:32.1 | S: Sāriputta, there are these four kinds of reproduction. | T: Four Kinds of Generation “Sāriputta, there are these four kinds of generation.
mn12:32.2 | S: What four? | T: What are the four?
mn12:32.3 | S: Reproduction for creatures born from an egg, from a womb, from moisture, or spontaneously. | T: Egg-born generation, womb-born generation, moisture-born generation, and spontaneous generation.
mn12:33.1 | S: And what is reproduction from an egg? | T: “What is egg-born generation?
mn12:33.2 | S: There are beings who are born by breaking out of an eggshell. | T: There are these beings born by breaking out of the shell of an egg;
mn12:33.3 | S: This is called reproduction from an egg. | T: this is called egg-born generation.
mn12:33.4 | S: And what is reproduction from a womb? | T: What is womb-born generation?
mn12:33.5 | S: There are beings who are born by breaking out of the amniotic sac. | T: There are these beings born by breaking out from the caul;
mn12:33.6 | S: This is called reproduction from a womb. | T: this is called womb-born generation.
mn12:33.7 | S: And what is reproduction from moisture? | T: What is moisture-born generation?
mn12:33.8 | S: There are beings who are born in a rotten fish, a rotten carcass, rotten porridge, a cesspool, or a sump. | T: There are these beings born in a rotten fish, in a rotten corpse, in rotten porridge, in a cesspit, or in a sewer;
mn12:33.9 | S: This is called reproduction from moisture. | T: this is called moisture-born generation.
mn12:33.10 | S: And what is spontaneous reproduction? | T: What is spontaneous generation?
mn12:33.11 | S: Gods, hell-beings, certain humans, and certain beings in the lower realms. | T: There are gods and denizens of hell and certain human beings and some beings in the lower worlds;
mn12:33.12 | S: This is called spontaneous reproduction. | T: this is called spontaneous generation.
mn12:33.13 | S: These are the four kinds of reproduction. | T: These are the four kinds of generation.
mn12:34.1 | S: When I know and see in this way, suppose someone were to say this: | T: “Sāriputta, when I know and see thus,
mn12:34.2 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has no superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones …’ | T: should anyone say of me…
mn12:34.3 | S: Unless they give up that speech and that thought, and let go of that view, they will be placed in hell as if delivered there. | T: he will wind up in hell.
mn12:34.4 | P: Seyyathāpi, sāriputta, bhikkhu sīlasampanno samādhisampanno paññāsampanno diṭṭheva dhamme aññaṁ ārādheyya, evaṁ sampadamidaṁ, sāriputta, vadāmi. | T: (none)
mn12:34.5 | P: Taṁ vācaṁ appahāya taṁ cittaṁ appahāya taṁ diṭṭhiṁ appaṭinissajjitvā yathābhataṁ nikkhitto evaṁ niraye. | T: (none)
mn12:35.1 | S: There are these five destinations. | T: The Five Destinations and Nibbāna “Sāriputta, there are these five destinations.
mn12:35.2 | S: What five? | T: What are the five?
mn12:35.3 | S: Hell, the animal realm, the ghost realm, humanity, and the gods. | T: Hell, the animal realm, the realm of ghosts, human beings, and gods.
mn12:36.1 | S: I understand hell, and the path and practice that leads to hell. | T: (1) “I understand hell, and the path and way leading to hell.
mn12:36.2 | S: And I understand how someone practicing that way, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: And I also understand how one who has entered this path will, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, in hell.
mn12:36.3 | S: I understand the animal realm … | T: (2) “I understand the animal realm, and the path and way leading to the animal realm.
mn12:36.4 | P: yathā paṭipanno ca kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā tiracchānayoniṁ upapajjati tañca pajānāmi. | T: And I also understand how one who has entered this path will, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in the animal realm.
mn12:36.5 | P: Pettivisayañcāhaṁ, sāriputta, pajānāmi, pettivisayagāmiñca maggaṁ, pettivisayagāminiñca paṭipadaṁ; | T: (3) “I understand the realm of ghosts, and the path and way leading to the realm of ghosts.
mn12:36.6 | S: the ghost realm … | T: And I also understand how one who has entered this path will, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in the realm of ghosts.
mn12:36.7 | S: humanity … | T: (4) “I understand human beings, and the path and way leading to the human world.
mn12:36.8 | P: yathā paṭipanno ca kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā manussesu upapajjati tañca pajānāmi. | T: And I also understand how one who has entered this path will, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear among human beings.
mn12:36.9 | S: gods, and the path and practice that leads to the world of the gods. | T: (5) “I understand the gods, and the path and way leading to the world of the gods.
mn12:36.10 | S: And I understand how someone practicing that way, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. | T: And I also understand how one who has entered this path will, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in a happy destination, in the heavenly world.
mn12:36.11 | S: And I understand extinguishment, and the path and practice that leads to extinguishment. | T: (6) “I understand Nibbāna, and the path and way leading to Nibbāna.
mn12:36.12 | S: And I understand how someone practicing that way realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, and lives having realized it with their own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements. | T: And I also understand how one who has entered this path will, by realising for himself with direct knowledge, here and now enter upon and abide in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints.
mn12:37.1 | S: When I’ve comprehended the mind of a certain individual, I understand: | T: (1) “By encompassing mind with mind I understand a certain person thus:
mn12:37.2 | S: ‘This individual is practicing in such a way and is riding upon such a path that when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.’ | T: ‘This person so behaves, so conducts himself, has taken such a path that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, in hell.’
mn12:37.3 | S: Some time later I see that they have indeed been reborn in hell, where they experience absolutely painful feelings, sharp and severe. | T: And then later on, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, I see that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he has reappeared in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, in hell, and is experiencing exclusively painful, racking, piercing feelings.
mn12:37.4 | S: Suppose there was a pit of glowing coals deeper than a man’s height, full of glowing coals that neither flamed nor smoked. | T: Suppose there were a charcoal pit deeper than a man’s height full of glowing coals without flame or smoke;
mn12:37.5 | S: Then along comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and parched. And they have set out on a path that meets with that same pit of coals. | T: and then a man scorched and exhausted by hot weather, weary, parched, and thirsty, came by a path going in one way only and directed to that same charcoal pit.
mn12:37.6 | S: If a person with clear eyes saw them, they’d say: | T: Then a man with good sight on seeing him would say:
mn12:37.7 | S: ‘This person is proceeding in such a way and is riding upon such a path that they will arrive at that very pit of coals.’ | T: ‘This person so behaves, so conducts himself, has taken such a path, that he will come to this same charcoal pit’;
mn12:37.8 | S: Some time later they see that they have indeed fallen into that pit of coals, where they experience absolutely painful feelings, sharp and severe. … | T: and then later on he sees that he has fallen into that charcoal pit and is experiencing exclusively painful, racking, piercing feelings.
mn12:37.9 | P: Evameva kho ahaṁ, sāriputta, idhekaccaṁ puggalaṁ evaṁ cetasā ceto paricca pajānāmi— | T: So too, by encompassing mind with mind…piercing feelings.
mn12:37.10 | P: tathāyaṁ puggalo paṭipanno tathā ca iriyati tañca maggaṁ samārūḷho yathā kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā apāyaṁ duggatiṁ vinipātaṁ nirayaṁ upapajjissatīti. | T: (none)
mn12:37.11 | P: Tamenaṁ passāmi aparena samayena dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā apāyaṁ duggatiṁ vinipātaṁ nirayaṁ upapannaṁ, ekantadukkhā tibbā kaṭukā vedanā vedayamānaṁ. | T: (none)
mn12:38.1 | S: When I’ve comprehended the mind of a certain individual, I understand: | T: (2) “By encompassing mind with mind I understand a certain person thus:
mn12:38.2 | S: ‘This individual … will be reborn in the animal realm.’ | T: ‘This person so behaves, so conducts himself, has taken such a path that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in the animal realm.’
mn12:38.3 | S: Some time later I see that they have indeed been reborn in the animal realm, where they suffer painful feelings, sharp and severe. | T: And then later on, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, I see that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he has reappeared in the animal realm and is experiencing painful, racking, piercing feelings.
mn12:38.4 | S: Suppose there was a sewer deeper than a man’s height, full to the brim with feces. | T: Suppose there were a cesspit deeper than a man’s height full of filth;
mn12:38.5 | S: Then along comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and parched. And they have set out on a path that meets with that same sewer. | T: and then a man scorched and exhausted by hot weather, weary, parched, and thirsty, came by a path going in one way only and directed to that same cesspit.
mn12:38.6 | S: If a person with clear eyes saw them, they’d say: | T: Then a man with good sight on seeing him would say:
mn12:38.7 | S: ‘This person is proceeding in such a way and is riding upon such a path that they will arrive at that very sewer.’ | T: ‘This person so behaves…that he will come to this same cesspit’;
mn12:38.8 | S: Some time later they see that they have indeed fallen into that sewer, where they suffer painful feelings, sharp and severe. … | T: and then later on he sees that he has fallen into that cesspit and is experiencing painful, racking, piercing feelings.
mn12:38.9 | P: Evameva kho ahaṁ, sāriputta, idhekaccaṁ puggalaṁ evaṁ cetasā ceto paricca pajānāmi— | T: So too, by encompassing mind with mind…piercing feelings.
mn12:38.10 | P: tathāyaṁ puggalo paṭipanno tathā ca iriyati tañca maggaṁ samārūḷho, yathā kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā tiracchānayoniṁ upapajjissatīti. | T: (none)
mn12:38.11 | P: Tamenaṁ passāmi aparena samayena dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā tiracchānayoniṁ upapannaṁ, dukkhā tibbā kaṭukā vedanā vedayamānaṁ. | T: (none)
mn12:39.1 | S: When I’ve comprehended the mind of a certain individual, I understand: | T: (3) “By encompassing mind with mind I understand a certain person thus:
mn12:39.2 | S: ‘This individual … will be reborn in the ghost realm.’ | T: ‘This person so behaves, so conducts himself, has taken such a path that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in the realm of ghosts.’
mn12:39.3 | S: Some time later I see that they have indeed been reborn in the ghost realm, where they experience mostly painful feelings. | T: And then later on…I see that…he has reappeared in the realm of ghosts and is experiencing much painful feeling.
mn12:39.4 | S: Suppose there was a tree growing on rugged ground, with thin foliage casting dappled shade. | T: Suppose there were a tree growing on uneven ground with scanty foliage casting a dappled shadow;
mn12:39.5 | S: Then along comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and parched. And they have set out on a path that meets with that same tree. | T: and then a man scorched and exhausted by hot weather, weary, parched, and thirsty, came by a path going in one way only and directed to that same tree.
mn12:39.6 | S: If a person with clear eyes saw them, they’d say: | T: Then a man with good sight on seeing him would say:
mn12:39.7 | S: ‘This person is proceeding in such a way and is riding upon such a path that they will arrive at that very tree.’ | T: ‘This person so behaves… that he will come to this same tree’;
mn12:39.8 | S: Some time later they see them sitting or lying under that tree, where they experience mostly painful feelings. … | T: and then later on he sees that he is sitting or lying in the shade of that tree experiencing much painful feeling.
mn12:39.9 | P: Evameva kho ahaṁ, sāriputta, idhekaccaṁ puggalaṁ evaṁ cetasā ceto paricca pajānāmi— | T: So too, by encompassing mind with mind …much painful feeling.
mn12:39.10 | P: tathāyaṁ puggalo paṭipanno tathā ca iriyati tañca maggaṁ samārūḷho, yathā kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā pettivisayaṁ upapajjissatīti. | T: (none)
mn12:39.11 | P: Tamenaṁ passāmi aparena samayena dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā pettivisayaṁ upapannaṁ, dukkhabahulā vedanā vedayamānaṁ. | T: (none)
mn12:40.1 | S: When I’ve comprehended the mind of a certain individual, I understand: | T: (4) “By encompassing mind with mind I understand a certain person thus:
mn12:40.2 | S: ‘This individual … will be reborn among human beings.’ | T: ‘This person so behaves, so conducts himself, has taken such a path that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear among human beings.’
mn12:40.3 | S: Some time later I see that they have indeed been reborn among human beings, where they experience mostly pleasant feelings. | T: And then later on…I see that…he has reappeared among human beings and is experiencing much pleasant feeling.
mn12:40.4 | S: Suppose there was a tree growing on smooth ground, with abundant foliage casting dense shade. | T: Suppose there were a tree growing on even ground with thick foliage casting a deep shade;
mn12:40.5 | S: Then along comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and parched. And they have set out on a path that meets with that same tree. | T: and then a man scorched and exhausted by hot weather, weary, parched, and thirsty, came by a path going in one way only and directed to that same tree.
mn12:40.6 | S: If a person with clear eyes saw them, they’d say: | T: Then a man with good sight on seeing him would say:
mn12:40.7 | S: ‘This person is proceeding in such a way and is riding upon such a path that they will arrive at that very tree.’ | T: ‘This person so behaves…that he will come to this same tree’;
mn12:40.8 | S: Some time later they see them sitting or lying under that tree, where they experience mostly pleasant feelings. … | T: and then later on he sees that he is sitting or lying in the shade of that tree experiencing much pleasant feeling.
mn12:40.9 | P: Evameva kho ahaṁ, sāriputta, idhekaccaṁ puggalaṁ evaṁ cetasā ceto paricca pajānāmi— | T: So too, by encompassing mind with mind…much pleasant feeling.
mn12:40.10 | P: tathāyaṁ puggalo paṭipanno tathā ca iriyati tañca maggaṁ samārūḷho yathā kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā manussesu upapajjissatīti. | T: (none)
mn12:40.11 | P: Tamenaṁ passāmi aparena samayena dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā manussesu upapannaṁ, sukhabahulā vedanā vedayamānaṁ. | T: (none)
mn12:41.1 | S: When I’ve comprehended the mind of a certain individual, I understand: | T: (5) “By encompassing mind with mind I understand a certain person thus:
mn12:41.2 | S: ‘This individual … will be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’ | T: ‘This person so behaves, so conducts himself, has taken such a path that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in a happy destination, in the heavenly world.’
mn12:41.3 | S: Some time later I see that they have indeed been reborn in a heavenly realm, where they experience feelings of absolute happiness. | T: And then later on…I see that…he has reappeared in a happy destination, in the heavenly world, and is experiencing exclusively pleasant feelings.
mn12:41.4 | S: Suppose there was a stilt longhouse with a peaked roof, plastered inside and out, draft-free, with door fastened and window shuttered. | T: Suppose there were a mansion, and it had an upper chamber plastered within and without, shut off, secured by bars, with shuttered windows,
mn12:41.5 | S: And it had a couch spread with woolen covers—shag-piled, pure white, or embroidered with flowers—and spread with a fine deer hide, with a canopy above and red pillows at both ends. | T: and in it there was a couch spread with rugs, blankets, and sheets, with a deer-skin coverlet, with a canopy as well as crimson pillows for both head and feet;
mn12:41.6 | S: Then along comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and parched. And they have set out on a path that meets with that same stilt longhouse. | T: and then a man scorched and exhausted by hot weather, weary, parched, and thirsty, came by a path going in one way only and directed to that same mansion.
mn12:41.7 | S: If a person with clear eyes saw them, they’d say: | T: Then a man with good sight on seeing him would say:
mn12:41.8 | S: ‘This person is proceeding in such a way and is riding upon such a path that they will arrive at that very stilt longhouse.’ | T: ‘This person so behaves…that he will come to this same mansion’;
mn12:41.9 | S: Some time later they see them sitting or lying in that stilt longhouse, where they experience feelings of absolute happiness. … | T: and then later on he sees that he is sitting or lying in that upper chamber in that mansion experiencing exclusively pleasant feelings.
mn12:41.10 | P: Evameva kho ahaṁ, sāriputta, idhekaccaṁ puggalaṁ evaṁ cetasā ceto paricca pajānāmi— | T: So too, by encompassing mind with mind…exclusively pleasant feelings.
mn12:41.11 | P: tathāyaṁ puggalo paṭipanno tathā ca iriyati tañca maggaṁ samārūḷho yathā kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā sugatiṁ saggaṁ lokaṁ upapajjissatīti. | T: (none)
mn12:41.12 | P: Tamenaṁ passāmi aparena samayena dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā sugatiṁ saggaṁ lokaṁ upapannaṁ, ekantasukhā vedanā vedayamānaṁ. | T: (none)
mn12:42.1 | S: When I’ve comprehended the mind of a certain individual, I understand: | T: (6) “By encompassing mind with mind I understand a certain person thus:
mn12:42.2 | S: ‘This individual is practicing in such a way and is riding upon such a path that they will realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, and live having realized it with their own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements.’ | T: ‘This person so behaves, so conducts himself, has taken such a path that by realising for himself with direct knowledge, he here and now will enter upon and abide in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints.’
mn12:42.3 | S: Some time later I see that they have indeed realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, and live having realized it with their own insight  in this very life due to the ending of defilements, experiencing feelings of absolute happiness. | T: And then later on I see that by realising for himself with direct knowledge, he here and now enters upon and abides in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints, and is experiencing exclusively pleasant feelings.
mn12:42.4 | S: Suppose there was a lotus pond with clear, sweet, cool water, clean, with smooth banks, delightful. | T: Suppose there were a pond with clean, agreeable, cool water, transparent, with smooth banks, delightful,
mn12:42.5 | S: Nearby was a dense forest grove. | T: and nearby a dense wood;
mn12:42.6 | S: Then along comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and parched. And they have set out on a path that meets with that same lotus pond. | T: and then a man scorched and exhausted by hot weather, weary, parched, and thirsty, came by a path going in one way only towards that same pond.
mn12:42.7 | S: If a person with clear eyes saw them, they’d say: | T: Then a man with good sight on seeing him would say:
mn12:42.8 | S: ‘This person is proceeding in such a way and is riding upon such a path that they will arrive at that very lotus pond.’ | T: ‘This person so behaves…that he will come to this same pond’;
mn12:42.9 | S: Some time later they would see that person after they had plunged into that lotus pond, bathed and drunk. When all their stress, weariness, and heat exhaustion had faded away, they emerged and sat or lay down in that woodland thicket, where they experienced feelings of absolute happiness. | T: and then later on he sees that he has plunged into the pond, bathed, drunk, and relieved all his distress, fatigue, and fever and has come out again and is sitting or lying in the wood experiencing exclusively pleasant feelings.
mn12:42.10 | S: In the same way, when I’ve comprehended the mind of an individual, I understand: | T: So too, by encompassing mind with mind…exclusively pleasant feelings.
mn12:42.11 | S: ‘This individual is practicing in such a way and is riding upon such a path that they will realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, and live having realized it with their own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements.’ | T: (none)
mn12:42.12 | S: Some time later I see that they have indeed realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, and live having realized it with their own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements, experiencing feelings of absolute happiness. | T: (none)
mn12:42.13 | S: These are the five destinations. | T: These are the five destinations.
mn12:43.1 | S: When I know and see in this way, suppose someone were to say this: | T: “Sāriputta, when I know and see thus, should anyone say of me:
mn12:43.2 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has no superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones. | T: ‘The recluse Gotama does not have any superhuman states, any distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.
mn12:43.3 | S: He teaches what he’s worked out by logic, following a line of inquiry, expressing his own perspective.’ | T: The recluse Gotama teaches a Dhamma merely hammered out by reasoning, following his own line of inquiry as it occurs to him’—
mn12:43.4 | S: Unless they give up that speech and that thought, and let go of that view, they will be placed in hell as if delivered there. | T: unless he abandons that assertion and that state of mind and relinquishes that view, then as surely as if he had been carried off and put there he will wind up in hell.
mn12:43.5 | S: Just as a mendicant accomplished in ethics, immersion, and wisdom would reach enlightenment in this very life, such is the consequence, I say. | T: Just as a bhikkhu possessed of virtue, concentration, and wisdom would here and now enjoy final knowledge, so it will happen in this case, I say,
mn12:43.6 | S: Unless they give up that speech and that thought, and let go of that view, they will be placed in hell as if delivered there. | T: that unless he abandons that assertion and that state of mind and relinquishes that view, then as surely as if he had been carried off and put there he will wind up in hell.
mn12:44.1 | S: Sāriputta, I recall having practiced a spiritual path consisting of four factors. | T: The Bodhisatta’s Austerities “Sāriputta, I recall having lived a holy life possessing four factors.
mn12:44.2 | S: I used to be a fervent mortifier, the ultimate fervent mortifier. I used to live rough, the ultimate rough-liver. I used to live in disgust of sin, the ultimate one living in disgust of sin. I used to be secluded, in ultimate seclusion. | T: I have been an ascetic—a supreme ascetic; I have been coarse—supremely coarse; I have been scrupulous—supremely scrupulous; I have been secluded—supremely secluded.
mn12:45.1 | S: And this is what my fervent mortification was like. I went naked, ignoring conventions. I licked my hands, and didn’t come or stop when asked. I didn’t consent to food brought to me, or food prepared specially for me, or an invitation for a meal. | T: “Such was my asceticism, Sāriputta, that I went naked, rejecting conventions, licking my hands, not coming when asked, not stopping when asked; I did not accept food brought or food specially made or an invitation to a meal;
mn12:45.2 | S: I didn’t receive anything from a pot or bowl; or from someone who keeps sheep, or who has a weapon or a shovel in their home; or where a couple is eating; or where there is a woman who is pregnant, breastfeeding, or who lives with a man; or where food for distribution is advertised; or where there’s a hound waiting or flies buzzing. I accepted no fish or meat or beer or wine, and drank no fermented gruel. | T: I received nothing from a pot, from a bowl, across a threshold, across a stick, across a pestle, from two eating together, from a pregnant woman, from a woman giving suck, from a woman in the midst of men, from where food was advertised to be distributed, from where a dog was waiting, from where flies were buzzing; I accepted no fish or meat, I drank no liquor, wine, or fermented brew.
mn12:45.3 | S: I went to just one house for alms, taking just one mouthful, or two houses and two mouthfuls, up to seven houses and seven mouthfuls. | T: I kept to one house, to one morsel; I kept to two houses, to two morsels;…I kept to seven houses, to seven morsels.
