## dn2, continued
dn2:55.2 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: This, too, is part of his virtue.
dn2:55.3 | S: The middle section on ethics is complete. | T: (none)
dn2:56.0 | S: 4.3.1.3. The Long Section on Ethics | T: The Great Section on Virtue
dn2:56.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: “Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, maintain themselves by wrong livelihood, by such “animal” arts as:
dn2:56.2 | S: This includes such fields as augury, omenology, divining portents, interpreting dreams, divining features of men and women, divining holes in cloth gnawed by mice, fire offerings, ladle offerings, offerings of husks, rice powder, rice, ghee, or oil; offerings from the mouth, blood sacrifices, limb-reading; geomancy for building sites, fields, and cemeteries; exorcisms, earth magic, snake charming, poisons; the lore of the scorpion, the rat, the bird, and the crow; prophesying lifespan, chanting for protection, and divining omens from wild animals. | T: reading marks on the limbs [e.g., palmistry]; reading omens & signs; interpreting celestial events [falling stars, comets]; interpreting dreams; reading features of the body [e.g., phrenology]; reading marks on cloth gnawed by mice; offering fire oblations, oblations from a ladle, oblations of husks, rice powder, rice grains, ghee, & oil; offering oblations from the mouth; offering blood-sacrifices; making predictions based on the fingertips; geomancy; making predictions for state officials; laying demons in a cemetery; placing spells on spirits; earth-skills [divining water and gems?]; snake-skills, poison-skills, scorpion-skills, rat-skills, bird-skills, crow-skills; predicting life spans; giving protective charms; casting horoscopes—
dn2:56.3 | S: They refrain from such low lore, such wrong livelihood. | T: he abstains from wrong livelihood, from “animal” arts such as these.
dn2:56.4 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: (none)
dn2:57.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: “Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, maintain themselves by wrong livelihood, by such “animal” arts as:
dn2:57.2 | S: This includes reading the marks of gems, cloth, clubs, swords, spears, arrows, bows, weapons, women, men, boys, girls, male and female bondservants, elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, cows, goats, rams, chickens, quails, monitor lizards, rabbits, tortoises, or deer. | T: determining lucky & unlucky gems, staffs, garments, swords, arrows, bows, & other weapons; women, men, boys, girls, male slaves, female slaves; elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, cows, goats, rams, fowl, quails, lizards, rabbits, tortoises, & other animals—
dn2:57.3 | S: They refrain from such low lore, such wrong livelihood. | T: he abstains from wrong livelihood, from “animal” arts such as these.
dn2:57.4 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: (none)
dn2:58.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: “Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, maintain themselves by wrong livelihood, by such “animal” arts as (forecasting):
dn2:58.2 | S: This includes making predictions that the king will march forth or march back; or that our king will attack and the enemy king will retreat, or vice versa; or that our king will triumph and the enemy king will be defeated, or vice versa; and so there will be victory for one and defeat for the other. | T: the rulers will march forth; the rulers will not march forth; our rulers will attack, and their rulers will retreat; their rulers will attack, and our rulers will retreat; there will be triumph for our rulers and defeat for their rulers; there will be triumph for their rulers and defeat for our rulers; thus there will be triumph for this one, defeat for that one—
dn2:58.3 | S: They refrain from such low lore, such wrong livelihood. | T: he abstains from wrong livelihood, from “animal” arts such as these.
dn2:58.4 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: (none)
dn2:59.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: “Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, maintain themselves by wrong livelihood, by such “animal” arts as (forecasting):
dn2:59.2 | S: This includes making predictions that there will be an eclipse of the moon, or sun, or stars; that the sun, moon, and stars will be in conjunction or in opposition; that there will be a meteor shower, a fiery horizon, an earthquake, or thunder in the heavens; that there will be a rising, a setting, a darkening, a brightening of the moon, sun, and stars. And it also includes making predictions about the results of all such phenomena. | T: there will be a lunar eclipse; there will be a solar eclipse; there will be an occultation of [a conjunction of the moon or a planet with] an asterism; the sun & moon will be favorable; the sun & moon will be unfavorable; the asterisms will be favorable; the asterisms will be unfavorable; there will be a meteor shower; there will be a flickering light on the horizon [an aurora?]; there will be an earthquake; there will be thunder coming from dry clouds; there will be a rising, a setting, a darkening, a brightening of the sun, moon, & asterisms; such will be the result of the lunar eclipse… the rising, setting, darkening, brightening of the sun, moon, & asterisms—
dn2:59.3 | S: They refrain from such low lore, such wrong livelihood. | T: he abstains from wrong livelihood, from “animal” arts such as these.
dn2:59.4 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: (none)
dn2:60.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: “Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, maintain themselves by wrong livelihood, by such “animal” arts as (forecasting):
dn2:60.2 | S: This includes predicting whether there will be plenty of rain or drought; plenty to eat or famine; an abundant harvest or a bad harvest; security or peril; sickness or health. It also includes such occupations as arithmetic, accounting, calculating, poetry, and cosmology. | T: there will be abundant rain; there will be a drought; there will be plenty; there will be famine; there will be rest and security; there will be danger; there will be disease; there will be freedom from disease; or they earn their living by accounting, counting, calculation, composing poetry, or teaching hedonistic arts & doctrines [lokāyata]—
dn2:60.3 | S: They refrain from such low lore, such wrong livelihood. | T: he abstains from wrong livelihood, from “animal” arts such as these.
dn2:60.4 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: (none)
dn2:61.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: “Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, maintain themselves by wrong livelihood, by such “animal” arts as:
dn2:61.2 | S: This includes making arrangements for giving and taking in marriage; for engagement and divorce; and for scattering rice inwards or outwards at the wedding ceremony. It also includes casting spells for good or bad luck, treating impacted fetuses, binding the tongue, or locking the jaws; charms for the hands and ears; questioning a mirror, a girl, or a god as an oracle; worshiping the sun, worshiping the Great One, breathing fire, and invoking Siri, the goddess of luck. | T: calculating auspicious dates for marriages—both those in which the bride is brought home and those in which she is sent out; calculating auspicious dates for betrothals and divorces; for collecting debts or making investments and loans; reciting charms to make people attractive or unattractive; curing women who have undergone miscarriages or abortions; reciting spells to bind a man’s tongue, to paralyze his jaws, to make him lose control over his hands, or to bring on deafness; getting oracular answers to questions addressed to a spirit in a mirror, in a young girl, or to a spirit medium; worshipping the sun, worshipping the Great Brahmā, bringing forth flames from the mouth, invoking the goddess of luck—
dn2:61.3 | S: They refrain from such low lore, such wrong livelihood. | T: he abstains from wrong livelihood, from “animal” arts such as these.
dn2:61.4 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: (none)
dn2:62.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: “Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, maintain themselves by wrong livelihood, by such “animal” arts as:
dn2:62.2 | S: This includes rites for propitiation, for granting wishes, for ghosts, for the earth, for rain, for property settlement, and for preparing and consecrating house sites, and rites involving sipping water and bathing, and oblations. It also includes administering emetics, purgatives, expectorants, and phlegmagogues; administering ear-oils, eye restoratives, nasal medicine, ointments, and counter-ointments; surgery with needle and scalpel, treating children, prescribing root medicines, and herbal bandages. | T: promising gifts to deities in return for favors; fulfilling such promises; demonology; reciting spells in earth houses [see earth skills, above]; inducing virility and impotence; preparing sites for construction; consecrating sites for construction; giving ceremonial mouthwashes and ceremonial baths; offering sacrificial fires; administering emetics, purges, purges from above, purges from below, head-purges; ear-oil, eye-drops, treatments through the nose, ointments, and counter-ointments; practicing eye-surgery [or: extractive surgery], general surgery, pediatrics; administering root-medicines and binding medicinal herbs—
dn2:62.3 | S: They refrain from such low lore, such wrong livelihood. | T: he abstains from wrong livelihood, from “animal” arts such as these.
dn2:62.4 | S: This pertains to their ethics. | T: This, too, is part of his virtue.
dn2:63.1 | S: A mendicant thus accomplished in ethics sees no danger in any quarter in regards to their ethical restraint. | T: (none)
dn2:63.2 | S: It’s like a king who has defeated his enemies. He sees no danger from his foes in any quarter. | T: (none)
dn2:63.3 | S: In the same way, a mendicant thus accomplished in ethics sees no danger in any quarter in regards to their ethical restraint. | T: (none)
dn2:63.4 | S: When they have this spectrum of noble ethics, they experience a blameless happiness inside themselves. | T: (none)
dn2:63.5 | S: That’s how a mendicant is accomplished in ethics. | T: (none)
dn2:63.6 | S: The longer section on ethics is complete. | T: (none)
dn2:64.0.1 | S: 4.3.2. Immersion | T: (none)
dn2:64.0.2 | S: 4.3.2.1. Sense Restraint | T: Sense Restraint
dn2:64.1 | S: And how does a mendicant guard the sense doors? | T: “And how does a monk guard the doors of his senses?
dn2:64.2 | S: When a mendicant sees a sight with their eyes, they don’t get caught up in the features and details. | T: On seeing a form with the eye, he does not grasp at any theme or details by which—
dn2:64.3 | S: If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint. | T: if he were to dwell without restraint over the faculty of the eye—evil, unskillful qualities such as greed or distress might assail him.
dn2:64.4 | S: When they hear a sound with their ears … | T: On hearing a sound with the ear.…
dn2:64.5 | S: When they smell an odor with their nose … | T: On smelling an aroma with the nose.…
dn2:64.6 | S: When they taste a flavor with their tongue … | T: On tasting a flavor with the tongue.…
dn2:64.7 | S: When they feel a touch with their body … | T: On touching a tactile sensation with the body.…
dn2:64.8 | S: When they know an idea with their mind, they don’t get caught up in the features and details. | T: On cognizing an idea with the intellect, he does not grasp at any theme or details by which—
dn2:64.9 | S: If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. | T: if he were to dwell without restraint over the faculty of the intellect—evil, unskillful qualities such as greed or distress might assail him.
dn2:64.10 | S: When they have this noble sense restraint, they experience an unsullied bliss inside themselves. | T: Endowed with this noble restraint over the sense faculties, he is inwardly sensitive to the pleasure of being blameless.
dn2:64.11 | S: That’s how a mendicant guards the sense doors. | T: This is how a monk guards the doors of his senses.
dn2:65.0 | S: 4.3.2.2. Mindfulness and Situational Awareness | T: Mindfulness & Alertness
dn2:65.1 | S: And how does a mendicant have mindfulness and situational awareness? | T: “And how is a monk possessed of mindfulness & alertness?
dn2:65.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant acts with situational awareness when going out and coming back; when looking ahead and aside; when bending and extending the limbs; when bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes; when eating, drinking, chewing, and tasting; when urinating and defecating; when walking, standing, sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping silent. | T: When going forward & returning, he makes himself alert. When looking toward & looking away.… when bending & extending his limbs.… when carrying his outer cloak, his upper robe, & his bowl.… when eating, drinking, chewing, & tasting.… when urinating & defecating.… when walking, standing, sitting, falling asleep, waking up, talking, & remaining silent, he makes himself alert.
dn2:65.3 | S: That’s how a mendicant has mindfulness and situational awareness. | T: This is how a monk is possessed of mindfulness & alertness.
dn2:66.0 | S: 4.3.2.3. Contentment | T: Contentedness
dn2:66.1 | S: And how is a mendicant content? | T: “And how is a monk content?
dn2:66.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant is content with robes to look after the body and almsfood to look after the belly. Wherever they go, they set out taking only these things. | T: (none)
dn2:66.3 | S: They’re like a bird: wherever it flies, wings are its only burden. | T: Just as a bird, wherever it goes, flies with its wings as its only burden;
dn2:66.4 | S: In the same way, a mendicant is content with robes to look after the body and almsfood to look after the belly. Wherever they go, they set out taking only these things. | T: so too is he content with a set of robes to provide for his body and alms food to provide for his hunger. Wherever he goes, he takes only his barest necessities along.
dn2:66.5 | S: That’s how a mendicant is content. | T: This is how a monk is content.
dn2:67.0 | S: 4.3.2.4. Giving Up the Hindrances | T: Abandoning the Hindrances
dn2:67.1 | S: When they have this spectrum of noble ethics, this noble sense restraint, this noble mindfulness and situational awareness, and this noble contentment, | T: “Endowed with this noble aggregate of virtue, this noble restraint over the sense faculties, this noble mindfulness and alertness, and this noble contentment,
dn2:67.2 | S: they frequent a secluded lodging—a wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw. | T: he seeks out a secluded dwelling: a wilderness, the shade of a tree, a mountain, a glen, a hillside cave, a charnel ground, a forest grove, the open air, a heap of straw.
dn2:67.3 | S: After the meal, they return from almsround, sit down cross-legged, set their body straight, and bring mindfulness to the present. | T: After his meal, returning from his alms round, he sits down, crosses his legs, holds his body erect, and brings mindfulness to the fore.
dn2:68.1 | S: Giving up covetousness for the world, they meditate with a heart rid of covetousness, cleansing the mind of covetousness. | T: “Abandoning covetousness with regard to the world, he dwells with an awareness devoid of covetousness. He cleanses his mind of covetousness.
dn2:68.2 | S: Giving up ill will and malevolence, they meditate with a mind rid of ill will, full of sympathy for all living beings, cleansing the mind of ill will. | T: Abandoning ill will & anger, he dwells with an awareness devoid of ill will, sympathetic with the welfare of all living beings. He cleanses his mind of ill will & anger.
dn2:68.3 | S: Giving up dullness and drowsiness, they meditate with a mind rid of dullness and drowsiness, perceiving light, mindful and aware, cleansing the mind of dullness and drowsiness. | T: Abandoning sloth & drowsiness, he dwells with an awareness devoid of sloth & drowsiness, mindful, alert, percipient of light. He cleanses his mind of sloth & drowsiness.
dn2:68.4 | S: Giving up restlessness and remorse, they meditate without restlessness, their mind settled internally, cleansing the mind of restlessness and remorse. | T: Abandoning restlessness & anxiety, he dwells undisturbed, his mind inwardly stilled. He cleanses his mind of restlessness & anxiety.
dn2:68.5 | S: Giving up doubt, they meditate having gone beyond doubt, not undecided about skillful qualities, cleansing the mind of doubt. | T: Abandoning uncertainty, he dwells having crossed over uncertainty, with no perplexity with regard to skillful qualities. He cleanses his mind of uncertainty.
dn2:69.1 | S: Suppose a man who has gotten into debt were to apply himself to work, | T: “Suppose that a man, taking a loan, invests it in his business affairs.
dn2:69.2 | S: and his efforts proved successful. | T: His business affairs succeed.
dn2:69.3 | S: He would pay off the original loan and have enough left over to support his partner. | T: He repays his old debts and there is extra left over for maintaining his wife.
dn2:69.4 | S: Thinking about this, | T: The thought would occur to him,
dn2:69.5 | P: ‘ahaṁ kho pubbe iṇaṁ ādāya kammante payojesiṁ. | T: ‘Before, taking a loan, I invested it in my business affairs.
dn2:69.6 | P: Tassa me te kammantā samijjhiṁsu. | T: Now my business affairs have succeeded.
dn2:69.7 | P: Sohaṁ yāni ca porāṇāni iṇamūlāni, tāni ca byantiṁ akāsiṁ, atthi ca me uttariṁ avasiṭṭhaṁ dārabharaṇāyā’ti. | T: I have repaid my old debts and there is extra left over for maintaining my wife.’
dn2:69.8 | S: he’d be filled with joy and happiness. | T: Because of that he would experience joy and happiness.
dn2:70.1 | S: Suppose there was a person who was sick, suffering, gravely ill. They’d lose their appetite and get physically weak. | T: “Now suppose that a man falls sick—in pain and seriously ill. He does not enjoy his meals, and there is no strength in his body.
dn2:70.2 | S: But after some time they’d recover from that illness, and regain their appetite and their strength. | T: As time passes, he eventually recovers from that sickness. He enjoys his meals and there is strength in his body.
dn2:70.3 | S: Thinking about this, | T: The thought would occur to him,
dn2:70.4 | P: ‘ahaṁ kho pubbe ābādhiko ahosiṁ dukkhito bāḷhagilāno; | T: ‘Before, I was sick.…
dn2:70.5 | P: bhattañca me nacchādesi, na ca me āsi kāye balamattā. | T: (none)
dn2:70.6 | P: Somhi etarahi tamhā ābādhā mutto; | T: Now I am recovered from that sickness.
dn2:70.7 | P: bhattañca me chādeti, atthi ca me kāye balamattā’ti. | T: I enjoy my meals and there is strength in my body.’
dn2:70.8 | S: they’d be filled with joy and happiness. | T: Because of that he would experience joy and happiness.
dn2:71.1 | S: Suppose a person was imprisoned in a jail. | T: “Now suppose that a man is bound in prison.
dn2:71.2 | S: But after some time they were released from jail, safe and sound, with no loss of wealth. | T: As time passes, he eventually is released from that bondage, safe and sound, with no loss of property.
dn2:71.3 | S: Thinking about this, | T: The thought would occur to him,
dn2:71.4 | P: ‘ahaṁ kho pubbe bandhanāgāre baddho ahosiṁ, somhi etarahi tamhā bandhanāgārā mutto sotthinā abbhayena. | T: ‘Before, I was bound in prison. Now I am released from that bondage, safe and sound,
dn2:71.5 | P: Natthi ca me kiñci bhogānaṁ vayo’ti. | T: with no loss of my property.’
dn2:71.6 | S: they’d be filled with joy and happiness. | T: Because of that he would experience joy and happiness.
dn2:72.1 | S: Suppose a person was a bondservant. They would not be their own master, but indentured to another, unable to go where they wish. | T: “Now suppose that a man is a slave, subject to others, not subject to himself, unable to go where he likes.
dn2:72.2 | S: But after some time they’d be freed from servitude. They would be their own master, not indentured to another, a freeman able to go where they wish. | T: As time passes, he eventually is released from that slavery, subject to himself, not subject to others, freed, able to go where he likes.
dn2:72.3 | S: Thinking about this, | T: The thought would occur to him,
dn2:72.4 | P: ‘ahaṁ kho pubbe dāso ahosiṁ anattādhīno parādhīno na yenakāmaṅgamo. | T: ‘Before, I was a slave.…
dn2:72.5 | P: Somhi etarahi tamhā dāsabyā mutto attādhīno aparādhīno bhujisso yenakāmaṅgamo’ti. | T: Now I am released from that slavery, subject to myself, not subject to others, freed, able to go where I like.’
dn2:72.6 | S: they’d be filled with joy and happiness. | T: Because of that he would experience joy and happiness.
dn2:73.1 | S: Suppose there was a person with wealth and property who was traveling along a desert road, which was perilous, with nothing to eat. | T: “Now suppose that a man, carrying money and goods, is traveling by a road through desolate country.
dn2:73.2 | S: But after some time they crossed over the desert safely, arriving within a village, a sanctuary free of peril. | T: As time passes, he eventually emerges from that desolate country, safe and sound, with no loss of property.
dn2:73.3 | S: Thinking about this, | T: The thought would occur to him,
dn2:73.4 | P: ‘ahaṁ kho pubbe sadhano sabhogo kantāraddhānamaggaṁ paṭipajjiṁ dubbhikkhaṁ sappaṭibhayaṁ. | T: ‘Before, carrying money and goods, I was traveling by a road through desolate country.
dn2:73.5 | P: Somhi etarahi taṁ kantāraṁ nitthiṇṇo sotthinā, gāmantaṁ anuppatto khemaṁ appaṭibhayan’ti. | T: Now I have emerged from that desolate country, safe and sound, with no loss of my property.’
dn2:73.6 | S: they’d be filled with joy and happiness. | T: Because of that he would experience joy and happiness.
dn2:74.1 | S: In the same way, as long as these five hindrances are not given up inside themselves, a mendicant regards them as a debt, a disease, a prison, slavery, and a desert crossing. | T: “In the same way, when these five hindrances are not abandoned in himself, the monk regards it as a debt, a sickness, a prison, slavery, a road through desolate country.
dn2:74.2 | S: But when these five hindrances are given up inside themselves, a mendicant regards this as freedom from debt, good health, release from prison, emancipation, and a place of sanctuary at last. | T: But when these five hindrances are abandoned in himself, he regards it as unindebtedness, good health, release from prison, freedom, a place of security.
dn2:74.3 | P: evameva kho, mahārāja, bhikkhu ime pañca nīvaraṇe pahīne attani samanupassati. | T: (none)
dn2:74.4 | S: Seeing that the hindrances have been given up in them, joy springs up. Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, they feel bliss. And when blissful, the mind becomes immersed. | T: When he sees that they have been abandoned within him, gladness is born. In one who is gladdened, rapture is born. Enraptured at heart, his body grows calm. His body calm, he is sensitive to pleasure. Feeling pleasure, his mind becomes concentrated.
dn2:75.0 | S: 4.3.2.5. First Absorption | T: The Four Jhānas
dn2:75.1 | S: Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: “Quite secluded from sensuality, secluded from unskillful qualities, he enters and remains in the first jhāna: rapture & pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by directed thought and evaluation.
dn2:75.2 | S: They drench, steep, fill, and spread themselves with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. | T: He permeates and pervades, suffuses and fills this very body with the rapture & pleasure born of seclusion.
dn2:76.1 | S: It’s like when a deft bathroom attendant or their apprentice pours bath powder into a bronze dish, sprinkling it little by little with water. They knead it until the ball of bath powder is soaked and saturated with moisture, spread through inside and out; yet no moisture oozes out. | T: Just as if a dexterous bathman or bathman’s apprentice would pour bath powder into a brass basin and knead it together, sprinkling it again and again with water, so that his ball of bath powder—saturated, moisture-laden, permeated within and without—would nevertheless not drip;
dn2:76.2 | S: In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads themselves with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. | T: even so, the monk permeates…this very body with the rapture & pleasure born of seclusion. There is nothing of his entire body unpervaded by rapture & pleasure born of seclusion.
dn2:76.3 | S: This, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This is a fruit of the contemplative life, visible here & now, more excellent than the previous ones and more sublime.
dn2:77.0 | S: 4.3.2.6. Second Absorption | T: (none)
dn2:77.1 | S: Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: “Then, with the stilling of directed thoughts & evaluations, he enters and remains in the second jhāna: rapture & pleasure born of concentration, unification of awareness free from directed thought & evaluation—internal assurance.
dn2:77.2 | S: They drench, steep, fill, and spread themselves with rapture and bliss born of immersion. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with rapture and bliss born of immersion. | T: He permeates and pervades, suffuses and fills this very body with the rapture & pleasure born of concentration.
dn2:78.1 | S: It’s like a deep lake fed by spring water. There’s no inlet to the east, west, north, or south, and the heavens would not properly bestow showers from time to time. | T: Just like a lake with spring-water welling up from within, having no inflow from the east, west, north, or south, and with the skies supplying abundant showers time and again,
dn2:78.2 | S: But the stream of cool water welling up in the lake drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads throughout the lake. There’s no part of the lake that’s not spread through with cool water. | T: so that the cool fount of water welling up from within the lake would permeate and pervade, suffuse and fill it with cool waters, there being no part of the lake unpervaded by the cool waters;
dn2:78.3 | S: In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads themselves with rapture and bliss born of immersion. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with rapture and bliss born of immersion. | T: even so, the monk permeates… this very body with the rapture & pleasure born of concentration. There is nothing of his entire body unpervaded by rapture & pleasure born of concentration.
dn2:78.4 | S: This too, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This, too, is a fruit of the contemplative life, visible here & now, more excellent than the previous ones and more sublime.
dn2:79.0 | S: 4.3.2.7. Third Absorption | T: (none)
dn2:79.1 | S: Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and remains in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, experiencing for themselves the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’ | T: “And then, with the fading of rapture, he remains equanimous, mindful, & alert, and senses pleasure with the body. He enters and remains in the third jhāna, of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous & mindful, he has a pleasant abiding.’
dn2:79.2 | S: They drench, steep, fill, and spread themselves with bliss free of rapture. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with bliss free of rapture. | T: He permeates and pervades, suffuses and fills this very body with the pleasure divested of rapture.
dn2:80.1 | S: It’s like a pool with blue water lilies, or pink or white lotuses. Some of them sprout and grow in the water without rising above it, thriving underwater. From the tip to the root they’re drenched, steeped, filled, and soaked with cool water. There’s no part of them that’s not soaked with cool water. | T: Just as in a lotus pond, some of the lotuses, born and growing in the water, stay immersed in the water and flourish without standing up out of the water, so that they are permeated and pervaded, suffused and filled with cool water from their roots to their tips, and nothing of those lotuses would be unpervaded with cool water;
dn2:80.2 | S: In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads themselves with bliss free of rapture. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with bliss free of rapture. | T: even so, the monk permeates… this very body with the pleasure divested of rapture. There is nothing of his entire body unpervaded with pleasure divested of rapture.
dn2:80.3 | S: This too, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This, too, is a fruit of the contemplative life, visible here & now, more excellent than the previous ones and more sublime.
dn2:81.0 | S: 4.3.2.8. Fourth Absorption | T: (none)
dn2:81.1 | S: Furthermore, with the giving up of pleasure and pain and the disappearance of former happiness and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. | T: “And then, with the abandoning of pleasure & pain—as with the earlier disappearance of elation & distress—he enters and remains in the fourth jhāna: purity of equanimity & mindfulness, neither pleasure nor pain.
dn2:81.2 | S: They sit spreading their body through with pure bright mind. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with pure bright mind. | T: He sits, permeating the body with a pure, bright awareness.
dn2:82.1 | S: It’s like someone sitting wrapped from head to foot with white cloth. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread over with white cloth. | T: Just as if a man were sitting covered from head to foot with a white cloth so that there would be no part of his body to which the white cloth did not extend;
dn2:82.2 | S: In the same way, they sit spreading their body through with pure bright mind. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with pure bright mind. | T: even so, the monk sits, permeating the body with a pure, bright awareness. There is nothing of his entire body unpervaded by pure, bright awareness.
dn2:82.3 | S: This too, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This, too, great king, is a fruit of the contemplative life, visible here & now, more excellent than the previous ones and more sublime.
dn2:83.0.1 | S: 4.3.3. The Eight Knowledges | T: (none)
dn2:83.0.2 | S: 4.3.3.1. Knowledge and Vision | T: Insight Knowledge
dn2:83.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward knowledge and vision. | T: “With his mind thus concentrated, purified, and bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to knowledge and vision.
dn2:83.2 | S: They understand: | T: He discerns:
dn2:83.3 | S: ‘This body of mine is formed. It’s made up of the four principal states, produced by mother and father, built up from rice and porridge, liable to impermanence, to wearing away and erosion, to breaking up and destruction. | T: ‘This body of mine is endowed with form, composed of the four primary elements, born from mother and father, nourished with rice and porridge, subject to inconstancy, rubbing, pressing, dissolution, and dispersion.
dn2:83.4 | S: And this consciousness of mine is attached to it, tied to it.’ | T: And this consciousness of mine is supported here and bound up here.’
dn2:84.1 | S: Suppose there was a beryl gem that was naturally lustrous, eight-faceted, well-worked, transparent, clear, and unclouded, endowed with all good qualities. | T: Just as if there were a beautiful beryl gem of the purest water—eight faceted, well polished, clear, limpid, consummate in all its aspects,
dn2:84.2 | S: And it was strung with a thread of blue, yellow, red, white, or golden brown. | T: and going through the middle of it was a blue, yellow, red, white, or brown thread—
dn2:84.3 | S: And a person with clear eyes were to take it in their hand and examine it: | T: and a man with good eyesight, taking it in his hand, were to reflect on it thus:
dn2:84.4 | S: ‘This beryl gem is naturally lustrous, eight-faceted, well-worked, transparent, clear, and unclouded, endowed with all good qualities. | T: ‘This is a beautiful beryl gem of the purest water, eight faceted, well polished, clear, limpid, consummate in all its aspects.
dn2:84.5 | S: And it’s strung with a thread of blue, yellow, red, white, or golden brown.’ | T: And this, going through the middle of it, is a blue, yellow, red, white, or brown thread.’
dn2:84.6 | S: In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward knowledge and vision. | T: In the same way—with his mind thus concentrated, purified, and bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, and attained to imperturbability—the monk directs and inclines it to knowledge and vision.
dn2:84.7 | P: So evaṁ pajānāti: | T: He discerns:
dn2:84.8 | P: ‘ayaṁ kho me kāyo rūpī cātumahābhūtiko mātāpettikasambhavo odanakummāsūpacayo aniccucchādanaparimaddanabhedanaviddhaṁsanadhammo; | T: ‘This body of mine is endowed with form, composed of the four primary elements, born from mother and father, nourished with rice and porridge, subject to inconstancy, rubbing, pressing, dissolution, and dispersion.
dn2:84.9 | P: idañca pana me viññāṇaṁ ettha sitaṁ ettha paṭibaddhan’ti. | T: And this consciousness of mine is supported here and bound up here.’
dn2:84.10 | S: This too, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This, too, great king, is a fruit of the contemplative life, visible here & now, more excellent than the previous ones and more sublime.
dn2:85.0 | S: 4.3.3.2. Mind-Made Body | T: The Mind-made Body
dn2:85.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward the creation of a mind-made body. | T: “With his mind thus concentrated, purified, and bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to creating a mind-made body.
dn2:85.2 | S: From this body they create another body—formed, mind-made, whole in its major and minor limbs, not deficient in any faculty. | T: From this body he creates another body, endowed with form, made of the mind, complete in all its parts, not inferior in its faculties.
dn2:86.1 | S: Suppose a person was to draw a reed out from its sheath. | T: Just as if a man were to draw a reed from its sheath.
dn2:86.2 | S: They’d think: | T: The thought would occur to him:
dn2:86.3 | S: ‘This is the reed, this is the sheath. The reed and the sheath are different things. The reed has been drawn out from the sheath.’ | T: ‘This is the sheath, this is the reed. The sheath is one thing, the reed another, but the reed has been drawn out from the sheath.’
dn2:86.4 | S: Or suppose a person was to draw a sword out from its scabbard. | T: Or as if a man were to draw a sword from its scabbard.
dn2:86.5 | S: They’d think: | T: The thought would occur to him:
dn2:86.6 | S: ‘This is the sword, this is the scabbard. The sword and the scabbard are different things. The sword has been drawn out from the scabbard.’ | T: ‘This is the sword, this is the scabbard. The sword is one thing, the scabbard another, but the sword has been drawn out from the scabbard.’
dn2:86.7 | S: Or suppose a person was to draw a snake out from its slough. | T: Or as if a man were to pull a snake out from its slough.
dn2:86.8 | S: They’d think: | T: The thought would occur to him:
dn2:86.9 | S: ‘This is the snake, this is the slough. The snake and the slough are different things. The snake has been drawn out from the slough.’ | T: ‘This is the snake, this is the slough. The snake is one thing, the slough another, but the snake has been pulled out from the slough.’
dn2:86.10 | S: In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward the creation of a mind-made body. | T: In the same way—with his mind thus concentrated, purified, and bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, and attained to imperturbability, the monk directs and inclines it to creating a mind-made body.
dn2:86.11 | S: From this body they create another body—formed, mind-made, whole in its major and minor limbs, not deficient in any faculty. | T: From this body he creates another body, endowed with form, made of the mind, complete in all its parts, not inferior in its faculties.
dn2:86.12 | S: This too, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This, too, great king, is a fruit of the contemplative life, visible here & now, more excellent than the previous ones and more sublime.
dn2:87.0 | S: 4.3.3.3. Psychic Powers | T: Supranormal Powers
dn2:87.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward psychic power. | T: “With his mind thus concentrated, purified, and bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to the modes of supranormal powers.
dn2:87.2 | S: They wield the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying themselves and becoming one again; materializing and dematerializing; going unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful; controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity. | T: He wields manifold supranormal powers. Having been one he becomes many; having been many he becomes one. He appears. He vanishes. He goes unimpeded through walls, ramparts, and mountains as if through space. He dives in and out of the earth as if it were water. He walks on water without sinking as if it were dry land. Sitting cross-legged he flies through the air like a winged bird. With his hand he touches and strokes even the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful. He exercises influence with his body even as far as the Brahmā worlds.
dn2:88.1 | S: Suppose a deft potter or their apprentice had some well-prepared clay. They could produce any kind of pot that they like. | T: Just as a dexterous potter or his assistant could craft from well-prepared clay whatever kind of pottery vessel he likes,
dn2:88.2 | S: Or suppose a deft ivory-carver or their apprentice had some well-prepared ivory. They could produce any kind of ivory item that they like. | T: or as a dexterous ivory-carver or his assistant could craft from well-prepared ivory any kind of ivory-work he likes,
dn2:88.3 | S: Or suppose a deft goldsmith or their apprentice had some well-prepared gold. They could produce any kind of gold item that they like. | T: or as a dexterous goldsmith or his assistant could craft from well-prepared gold any kind of gold article he likes;
dn2:88.4 | S: In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward psychic power. | T: in the same way—with his mind thus concentrated, purified, and bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, and attained to imperturbability—the monk directs and inclines it to the modes of supranormal powers.…
dn2:88.5 | P: So anekavihitaṁ iddhividhaṁ paccanubhoti—ekopi hutvā bahudhā hoti, bahudhāpi hutvā eko hoti; āvibhāvaṁ tirobhāvaṁ tirokuṭṭaṁ tiropākāraṁ tiropabbataṁ asajjamāno gacchati seyyathāpi ākāse; pathaviyāpi ummujjanimujjaṁ karoti seyyathāpi udake; udakepi abhijjamāne gacchati seyyathāpi pathaviyā; ākāsepi pallaṅkena kamati seyyathāpi pakkhī sakuṇo; imepi candimasūriye evaṁmahiddhike evaṁmahānubhāve pāṇinā parāmasati parimajjati; yāva brahmalokāpi kāyena vasaṁ vatteti. | T: He exercises influence with his body even as far as the Brahmā worlds.
dn2:88.6 | S: This too, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This, too, great king, is a fruit of the contemplative life, visible here & now, more excellent than the previous ones and more sublime.
dn2:89.0 | S: 4.3.3.4. Clairaudience | T: Clairaudience
dn2:89.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward clairaudience. | T: “With his mind thus concentrated, purified, and bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to the divine ear-element.
dn2:89.2 | S: With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, they hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far. | T: He hears—by means of the divine ear-element, purified and surpassing the human—both kinds of sounds: divine and human, whether near or far.
dn2:90.1 | S: Suppose there was a person traveling along the road. They’d hear the sound of drums, clay drums, horns, kettledrums, and tom-toms. They’d think: ‘That’s the sound of drums,’ and ‘that’s the sound of clay drums,’ and ‘that’s the sound of horns, kettledrums, and tom-toms.’ | T: Just as if a man traveling along a highway were to hear the sounds of kettledrums, small drums, conchs, cymbals, and tom-toms. He would know, ‘That is the sound of kettledrums, that is the sound of small drums, that is the sound of conchs, that is the sound of cymbals, and that is the sound of tom-toms.’
dn2:90.2 | S: In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward clairaudience. | T: In the same way—with his mind thus concentrated, purified, and bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, and attained to imperturbability—the monk directs and inclines it to the divine ear-element.
dn2:90.3 | S: With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, they hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far. | T: He hears—by means of the divine ear-element, purified and surpassing the human—both kinds of sounds: divine and human, whether near or far.
dn2:90.4 | S: This too, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This, too, great king, is a fruit of the contemplative life, visible here & now, more excellent than the previous ones and more sublime.
dn2:91.0 | S: 4.3.3.5. Encompassing the Minds of Others | T: Mind Reading
dn2:91.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward encompassing the minds of others. | T: “With his mind thus concentrated, purified, and bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to knowledge of the awareness of other beings.
dn2:91.2 | S: They understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having encompassed them with their own mind. | T: He discerns the awareness of other beings, other individuals, having encompassed it with his own awareness.
dn2:91.3 | S: They understand mind with greed as ‘mind with greed’, | T: He discerns a mind with passion as ‘a mind with passion,’
dn2:91.4 | S: and mind without greed as ‘mind without greed’. | T: and a mind without passion as ‘a mind without passion.’
dn2:91.5 | S: They understand mind with hate … | T: He discerns a mind with aversion as ‘a mind with aversion,’
dn2:91.6 | S: mind without hate … | T: and a mind without aversion as ‘a mind without aversion.’
dn2:91.7 | S: mind with delusion … | T: He discerns a mind with delusion as ‘a mind with delusion,’
dn2:91.8 | S: mind without delusion … | T: and a mind without delusion as ‘a mind without delusion.’
dn2:91.9 | S: constricted mind … | T: He discerns a restricted mind as ‘a restricted mind,’
dn2:91.10 | S: scattered mind … | T: and a scattered mind as ‘a scattered mind.’
dn2:91.11 | S: expansive mind … | T: He discerns an enlarged mind as ‘an enlarged mind,’
dn2:91.12 | S: unexpansive mind … | T: and an unenlarged mind as ‘an unenlarged mind.’
dn2:91.13 | S: mind that is not supreme … | T: He discerns a surpassed mind [one that is not at the most excellent level] as ‘a surpassed mind,’
dn2:91.14 | S: mind that is supreme … | T: and an unsurpassed mind as ‘an unsurpassed mind.’
dn2:91.15 | S: immersed mind … | T: He discerns a concentrated mind as ‘a concentrated mind,’
dn2:91.16 | S: unimmersed mind … | T: and an unconcentrated mind as ‘an unconcentrated mind.’
dn2:91.17 | S: freed mind … | T: He discerns a released mind as ‘a released mind,’
dn2:91.18 | S: They understand unfreed mind as ‘unfreed mind’. | T: and an unreleased mind as ‘an unreleased mind.’
dn2:92.1 | S: Suppose there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of adornments, and they check their own reflection in a clean bright mirror or a clear bowl of water. If they had a spot they’d know ‘I have a spot,’ and if they had no spots they’d know ‘I have no spots.’ | T: Just as if a young woman—or man—fond of ornaments, examining the reflection of her own face in a bright mirror or a bowl of clear water would know ‘blemished’ if it were blemished, or ‘unblemished’ if it were not.
dn2:92.2 | S: In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward encompassing the minds of others. | T: In the same way—with his mind thus concentrated, purified, and bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, and attained to imperturbability—the monk directs and inclines it to knowledge of the awareness of other beings.
dn2:92.3 | S: They understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having encompassed them with their own mind. | T: He discerns the awareness of other beings, other individuals, having encompassed it with his own awareness.
dn2:92.4 | P: sarāgaṁ vā cittaṁ ‘sarāgaṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: He discerns a mind with passion as ‘a mind with passion,’
dn2:92.5 | P: vītarāgaṁ vā cittaṁ ‘vītarāgaṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: and a mind without passion as ‘a mind without passion’ …
dn2:92.6 | P: sadosaṁ vā cittaṁ ‘sadosaṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: (none)
dn2:92.7 | P: vītadosaṁ vā cittaṁ ‘vītadosaṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: (none)
dn2:92.8 | P: samohaṁ vā cittaṁ ‘samohaṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: (none)
dn2:92.9 | P: vītamohaṁ vā cittaṁ ‘vītamohaṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: (none)
dn2:92.10 | P: saṅkhittaṁ vā cittaṁ ‘saṅkhittaṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: (none)
dn2:92.11 | P: vikkhittaṁ vā cittaṁ ‘vikkhittaṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: (none)
dn2:92.12 | P: mahaggataṁ vā cittaṁ ‘mahaggataṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: (none)
dn2:92.13 | P: amahaggataṁ vā cittaṁ ‘amahaggataṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: (none)
dn2:92.14 | P: sauttaraṁ vā cittaṁ ‘sauttaraṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: (none)
dn2:92.15 | P: anuttaraṁ vā cittaṁ ‘anuttaraṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: (none)
dn2:92.16 | P: samāhitaṁ vā cittaṁ ‘samāhitaṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: (none)
dn2:92.17 | P: asamāhitaṁ vā cittaṁ ‘asamāhitaṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: (none)
dn2:92.18 | P: vimuttaṁ vā cittaṁ ‘vimuttaṁ cittan’ti pajānāti, | T: a released mind as ‘a released mind,’
dn2:92.19 | P: avimuttaṁ vā cittaṁ ‘avimuttaṁ cittan’ti pajānāti. | T: and an unreleased mind as ‘an unreleased mind.’
dn2:92.20 | S: This too, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This, too, great king, is a fruit of the contemplative life, visible here & now, more excellent than the previous ones and more sublime.
dn2:93.0 | S: 4.3.3.6. Recollection of Past Lives | T: Recollection of Past Lives
dn2:93.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward recollection of past lives. | T: “With his mind thus concentrated, purified, and bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to knowledge of the recollection of past lives [lit: previous homes].
dn2:93.2 | S: They recollect many kinds of past lives, that is, one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. They remember: ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ And so they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details. | T: He recollects his manifold past lives, i.e., one birth, two births, three births, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, one hundred, one thousand, one hundred thousand, many eons of cosmic contraction, many eons of cosmic expansion, many eons of cosmic contraction & expansion, (recollecting,) ‘There I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance. Such was my food, such my experience of pleasure & pain, such the end of my life. Passing away from that state, I re-arose there. There too I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance. Such was my food, such my experience of pleasure & pain, such the end of my life. Passing away from that state, I re-arose here.’ Thus he recollects his manifold past lives in their modes & details.
dn2:94.1 | S: Suppose a person was to leave their home village and go to another village. From that village they’d go to yet another village. And from that village they’d return to their home village. They’d think: ‘I went from my home village to another village. There I stood like this, sat like that, spoke like this, or kept silent like that. From that village I went to yet another village. There too I stood like this, sat like that, spoke like this, or kept silent like that. And from that village I returned to my home village.’ | T: Just as if a man were to go from his home village to another village, and then from that village to yet another village, and then from that village back to his home village. The thought would occur to him, ‘I went from my home village to that village over there. There I stood in such a way, sat in such a way, talked in such a way, and remained silent in such a way. From that village I went to that village over there, and there I stood in such a way, sat in such a way, talked in such a way, and remained silent in such a way. From that village I came back home.’
dn2:94.2 | S: In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward recollection of past lives. | T: In the same way—with his mind thus concentrated, purified, and bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, and attained to imperturbability—the monk directs and inclines it to knowledge of the recollection of past lives.
dn2:94.3 | P: So anekavihitaṁ pubbenivāsaṁ anussarati, seyyathidaṁ—ekampi jātiṁ dvepi jātiyo tissopi jātiyo catassopi jātiyo pañcapi jātiyo dasapi jātiyo vīsampi jātiyo tiṁsampi jātiyo cattālīsampi jātiyo paññāsampi jātiyo jātisatampi jātisahassampi jātisatasahassampi anekepi saṁvaṭṭakappe anekepi vivaṭṭakappe anekepi saṁvaṭṭavivaṭṭakappe, ‘amutrāsiṁ evaṁnāmo evaṅgotto evaṁvaṇṇo evamāhāro evaṁsukhadukkhappaṭisaṁvedī evamāyupariyanto, so tato cuto amutra udapādiṁ; tatrāpāsiṁ evaṁnāmo evaṅgotto evaṁvaṇṇo evamāhāro evaṁsukhadukkhappaṭisaṁvedī evamāyupariyanto, so tato cuto idhūpapanno’ti. Iti sākāraṁ sauddesaṁ anekavihitaṁ pubbenivāsaṁ anussarati. | T: He recollects his manifold past lives… in their modes & details.
dn2:94.4 | S: This too, Great King, is a fruit of the ascetic life that’s apparent in the present life which is better and finer than the former ones. | T: This, too, great king, is a fruit of the contemplative life, visible here & now, more excellent than the previous ones and more sublime.
dn2:95.0 | S: 4.3.3.7. Clairvoyance | T: The Passing Away & Re-appearance of Beings
dn2:95.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings. | T: “With his mind thus concentrated, purified, and bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to knowledge of the passing away and re-appearance of beings.
dn2:95.2 | S: With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds: ‘These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’ And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. | T: He sees—by means of the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human—beings passing away and re-appearing, and he discerns how they are inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate in accordance with their kamma: ‘These beings—who were endowed with bad conduct of body, speech, and mind, who reviled the noble ones, held wrong views and undertook actions under the influence of wrong views—with the break-up of the body, after death, have re-appeared in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell. But these beings—who were endowed with good conduct of body, speech, and mind, who did not revile the noble ones, who held right views and undertook actions under the influence of right views—with the break-up of the body, after death, have re-appeared in a good destination, a heavenly world.’ Thus—by means of the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human—he sees beings passing away and re-appearing, and he discerns how they are inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate in accordance with their kamma.
dn2:96.1 | S: Suppose there was a stilt longhouse at the central square. A person with clear eyes standing there might see humans entering and leaving a house, walking along the streets and paths, and sitting at the central square. They’d think: ‘These are people entering and leaving a house, walking along the streets and paths, and sitting at the central square.’ | T: Just as if there were a tall building in the central square (of a town), and a man with good eyesight standing on top of it were to see people entering a house, leaving it, walking along the street, and sitting in the central square. The thought would occur to him, ‘These people are entering a house, leaving it, walking along the streets, and sitting in the central square.’
dn2:96.2 | S: In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they project it and extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings. | T: In the same way—with his mind thus concentrated, purified, and bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, and attained to imperturbability—the monk directs and inclines it to knowledge of the passing away and re-appearance of beings.
dn2:96.3 | P: So dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena satte passati cavamāne upapajjamāne hīne paṇīte suvaṇṇe dubbaṇṇe sugate duggate, yathākammūpage satte pajānāti: ‘ime vata bhonto sattā kāyaduccaritena samannāgatā vacīduccaritena samannāgatā manoduccaritena samannāgatā ariyānaṁ upavādakā micchādiṭṭhikā micchādiṭṭhikammasamādānā, te kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā apāyaṁ duggatiṁ vinipātaṁ nirayaṁ upapannā. Ime vā pana bhonto sattā kāyasucaritena samannāgatā vacīsucaritena samannāgatā manosucaritena samannāgatā ariyānaṁ anupavādakā sammādiṭṭhikā sammādiṭṭhikammasamādānā. Te kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā sugatiṁ saggaṁ lokaṁ upapannā’ti. Iti dibbena cakkhunā visuddhena atikkantamānusakena satte passati cavamāne upapajjamāne hīne paṇīte suvaṇṇe dubbaṇṇe sugate duggate; yathākammūpage satte pajānāti. | T: He sees—by means of the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human—beings passing away and re-appearing, and he discerns how they are inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate in accordance with their kamma.…
