## mn70
mn70:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
mn70:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kāsis together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering in the Kāsi country together with a large Sangha of bhikkhus.
mn70:1.3 | S: There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: | T: There he addressed the bhikkhus thus:
mn70:2.1 | S: “Mendicants, I abstain from eating at night. | T: “Bhikkhus, I abstain from eating at night.
mn70:2.2 | S: Doing so, I find that I’m healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably. | T: By so doing, I am free from illness and affliction, and I enjoy lightness, strength, and a comfortable abiding.
mn70:2.3 | S: You too should never eat at night. | T: Come, bhikkhus, abstain from eating at night.
mn70:2.4 | S: Doing so, you’ll find that you’re healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably.” | T: By so doing, you too will be free from illness and affliction, and you will enjoy lightness, strength, and a comfortable abiding.”
mn70:2.5 | S: “Yes, sir,” they replied. | T: “Yes, venerable sir,” they replied.
mn70:3.1 | S: Then the Buddha, traveling stage by stage in the land of the Kāsis, arrived at a town of the Kāsis named Kīṭāgiri, | T: Then, as the Blessed One was wandering by stages in the Kāsi country, he eventually arrived at a Kāsi town called Kīṭāgiri. There he lived in this Kāsi town,
mn70:3.2 | S: and stayed there. | T: Kīṭāgiri.
mn70:4.1 | S: Now at that time the mendicants who followed Assaji and Punabbasuka were residing at Kīṭāgiri. | T: Now on that occasion the bhikkhus led by Assaji and Punabbasuka were residing at Kīṭāgiri.
mn70:4.2 | S: Then several mendicants went up to them and said, | T: Then a number of bhikkhus went and told them:
mn70:4.3 | S: “Reverends, the Buddha never eats at night, and neither does the mendicant Saṅgha. | T: “Friends, the Blessed One and the Sangha of bhikkhus now abstain from eating at night.
mn70:4.4 | S: Doing so, they find that they’re healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably. | T: By so doing, they are free from illness and affliction, and they enjoy health, strength, and a comfortable abiding.
mn70:4.5 | S: You too should abstain from eating at night. | T: Come, friends, abstain from eating at night.
mn70:4.6 | S: Doing so, you’ll find that you’re healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably.” | T: By so doing, you too will be free from illness and affliction, and you will enjoy lightness, strength, and a comfortable abiding.”
mn70:4.7 | S: When they said this, the mendicants who followed Assaji and Punabbasuka said to them, | T: When this was said, the bhikkhus led by Assaji and Punabbasuka told those bhikkhus:
mn70:4.8 | S: “Reverends, we eat at dusk, at daybreak, and at the wrong time of day. | T: “Friends, we eat in the evening, in the morning, and in the day outside the proper time.
mn70:4.9 | S: Doing so, we find that we’re healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably. | T: By so doing, we are free from illness and affliction, and we enjoy lightness, strength, and a comfortable abiding.
mn70:4.10 | S: Why should we give up what is apparent in the present to chase after what takes effect over time? | T: Why should we abandon a benefit visible here and now to pursue a benefit to be achieved at a future time?
mn70:4.11 | S: We shall eat at dusk, at daybreak, and at the wrong time of day.” | T: We shall eat in the evening, in the morning, and in the day outside the proper time.”
mn70:5.1 | S: Since those mendicants were unable to persuade the mendicants who were followers of Assaji and Punabbasuka, they approached the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. | T: Since the bhikkhus were unable to convince the bhikkhus led by Assaji and Punabbasuka, they went to the Blessed One. After paying homage to him, they sat down at one side and told him all that had occurred, adding: “Venerable sir, since we were unable to convince the bhikkhus led by Assaji and Punabbasuka, we have reported this matter to the Blessed One.”
mn70:6.1 | S: So the Buddha addressed one of the monks, | T: Then the Blessed One addressed a certain bhikkhu thus:
mn70:6.2 | S: “Please, monk, in my name tell the mendicants who follow Assaji and Punabbasuka that | T: “Come, bhikkhu, tell the bhikkhus led by Assaji and Punabbasuka in my name that the Teacher calls them.”
mn70:6.3 | S: the Teacher summons them.” | T: (none)
mn70:6.4 | S: “Yes, sir,” that monk replied. He went to those mendicants and said, | T: “Yes, venerable sir,” he replied, and he went to the bhikkhus led by Assaji and Punabbasuka and told them:
mn70:6.5 | S: “Venerables, the Teacher summons you.” | T: “The Teacher calls you, friends.”
mn70:6.6 | S: “Yes, reverend,” those mendicants replied. They went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. | T: “Yes, friend,” they replied, and they went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, sat down at one side.
mn70:6.7 | S: The Buddha said to them, “Is it really true, mendicants, that several mendicants went to you and said: | T: The Blessed One then said: “Bhikkhus, is it true that when a number of bhikkhus went and told you:
mn70:6.8 | S: ‘Reverends, the Buddha never eats at night, and neither does the mendicant Saṅgha. | T: ‘Friends, the Blessed One and the Sangha now abstain from eating at night…Come, friends,
mn70:6.9 | S: Doing so, they find that they’re healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably. | T: (none)
mn70:6.10 | S: You too should never eat at night. | T: abstain from eating at night …,’
mn70:6.11 | S: Doing so, you’ll find that you’re healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably.’ | T: (none)
mn70:6.12 | S: When they said this, did you really say to them: | T: you told those bhikkhus:
mn70:6.13 | S: ‘Reverends, we eat at dusk, at daybreak, and at the wrong time of day. | T: ‘Friends, we eat in the evening…Why should we abandon a benefit visible here and now to pursue a benefit to be achieved at a future time?
mn70:6.14 | S: Doing so, we find that we’re healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably. | T: (none)
mn70:6.15 | S: Why should we give up what is apparent in the present to chase after what takes effect over time? | T: (none)
mn70:6.16 | S: We shall eat at dusk, at daybreak, and at the wrong time of day.’” | T: We shall eat in the evening, in the morning, and in the day outside the proper time’?”—
mn70:6.17 | S: “Yes, sir.” | T: “Yes, venerable sir.”
mn70:6.18 | S: “Mendicants, have you ever known me to teach the Dhamma like this: no matter what this individual experiences—pleasurable, painful, or neutral—their unskillful qualities decline and their skillful qualities grow?” | T: “Bhikkhus, have you known me to teach the Dhamma in such a way as this: ‘Whatever this person experiences, whether pleasant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant, unwholesome states diminish in him and wholesome states increase’?”—
mn70:6.19 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “No, venerable sir.”
mn70:7.1 | S: “Haven’t you known me to teach the Dhamma like this: ‘When someone feels this kind of pleasant feeling, unskillful qualities grow and skillful qualities decline. But when someone feels that kind of pleasant feeling, unskillful qualities decline and skillful qualities grow. When someone feels this kind of painful feeling, unskillful qualities grow and skillful qualities decline. But when someone feels that kind of painful feeling, unskillful qualities decline and skillful qualities grow. When someone feels this kind of neutral feeling, unskillful qualities grow and skillful qualities decline. But when someone feels that kind of neutral feeling, unskillful qualities decline and skillful qualities grow’?” | T: “Bhikkhus, have you not known me to teach the Dhamma in such a way as this: ‘Here, when someone feels a certain kind of pleasant feeling, unwholesome states increase in him and wholesome states diminish; but when someone feels another kind of pleasant feeling, unwholesome states diminish in him and wholesome states increase. Here, when someone feels a certain kind of painful feeling, unwholesome states increase in him and wholesome states diminish; but when someone feels another kind of painful feeling, unwholesome states diminish in him and wholesome states increase. Here, when someone feels a certain kind of neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, unwholesome states increase in him and wholesome states diminish; but when someone feels another kind of neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, unwholesome states diminish in him and wholesome states increase’?”—
mn70:7.2 | S: “Yes, sir.” | T: “Yes, venerable sir.”
mn70:8.1 | S: “Good, mendicants! | T: “Good, bhikkhus.
mn70:8.2 | S: Now, suppose I hadn’t known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced this with wisdom: | T: And if it were unknown by me, unseen, unfound, unrealised, uncontacted by wisdom thus:
mn70:8.3 | S: ‘When someone feels this kind of pleasant feeling, unskillful qualities grow and skillful qualities decline.’ | T: ‘Here, when someone feels a certain kind of pleasant feeling, unwholesome states increase in him and wholesome states diminish,’
mn70:8.4 | S: Not knowing this, would it be appropriate for me to say: ‘You should give up this kind of pleasant feeling’?” | T: would it be fitting for me, not knowing that, to say: ‘Abandon such a kind of pleasant feeling’?”—
mn70:8.5 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “No, venerable sir.”
mn70:8.6 | S: “But I have known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced this with wisdom: | T: “But because it is known by me, seen, found, realised, contacted by wisdom thus:
mn70:8.7 | S: ‘When someone feels this kind of pleasant feeling, unskillful qualities grow and skillful qualities decline.’ Since this is so, that’s why I say: ‘You should give up this kind of pleasant feeling.’ | T: ‘Here, when someone feels a certain kind of pleasant feeling , unwholesome states increase in him and wholesome states diminish,’ that I therefore say: ‘Abandon such a kind of pleasant feeling.’
mn70:8.8 | S: Now, suppose I hadn’t known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced this with wisdom: | T: “If it were unknown by me, unseen, unfound, unrealised, uncontacted by wisdom thus:
mn70:8.9 | S: ‘When someone feels that kind of pleasant feeling, unskillful qualities decline and skillful qualities grow.’ | T: ‘Here, when someone feels another kind of pleasant feeling, unwholesome states diminish in him and wholesome states increase,’
mn70:8.10 | S: Not knowing this, would it be appropriate for me to say: ‘You should enter and remain in that kind of pleasant feeling’?” | T: would it be fitting for me, not knowing that, to say: ‘Enter upon and abide in such a kind of pleasant feeling’?”—
mn70:8.11 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “No, venerable sir.”
mn70:8.12 | S: “But I have known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced this with wisdom: | T: “But because it is known by me, seen, found, realised, contacted by wisdom thus:
mn70:8.13 | S: ‘When someone feels that kind of pleasant feeling, unskillful qualities decline and skillful qualities grow.’ Since this is so, that’s why I say: ‘You should enter and remain in that kind of pleasant feeling.’ | T: ‘Here, when someone feels another kind of pleasant feeling, unwholesome states diminish in him and wholesome states increase,’ that I therefore say: ‘Enter upon and abide in such a kind of pleasant feeling.’
mn70:8.14 | S: Now, suppose I hadn’t known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced this with wisdom: | T: “If it were unknown by me…But because it is known by me…contacted by wisdom thus:
mn70:8.15 | S: ‘When someone feels this kind of painful feeling, unskillful qualities grow and skillful qualities decline.’ | T: ‘Here, when someone feels a certain kind of painful feeling, unwholesome states increase in him and wholesome states diminish,’
mn70:8.16 | S: Not knowing this, would it be appropriate for me to say: ‘You should give up this kind of painful feeling’?” | T: that I therefore say: ‘Abandon such a kind of painful feeling.’
mn70:8.17 | S: “No, sir.” | T: (none)
mn70:9.1 | S: “But I have known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced this with wisdom: | T: “If it were unknown by me…But because it is known by me…contacted by wisdom thus:
mn70:9.2 | S: ‘When someone feels this kind of painful feeling, unskillful qualities grow and skillful qualities decline.’ Since this is so, that’s why I say: ‘You should give up this kind of painful feeling.’ | T: ‘Here, when someone feels another kind of painful feeling, unwholesome states diminish in him and wholesome states increase,’ that I therefore say:
mn70:9.3 | S: Now, suppose I hadn’t known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced this with wisdom: | T: (none)
mn70:9.4 | S: ‘When someone feels that kind of painful feeling, unskillful qualities decline and skillful qualities grow.’ | T: (none)
mn70:9.5 | S: Not knowing this, would it be appropriate for me to say: ‘You should enter and remain in that kind of painful feeling’?” | T: ‘Enter upon and abide in such a kind of painful feeling.’
mn70:9.6 | S: “No, sir.” | T: (none)
mn70:9.7 | S: “But I have known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced this with wisdom: | T: “If it were unknown by me…But because it is known by me…contacted by wisdom thus:
mn70:9.8 | S: ‘When someone feels that kind of painful feeling, unskillful qualities decline and skillful qualities grow.’ Since this is so, that’s why I say: ‘You should enter and remain in that kind of painful feeling.’ | T: ‘Here, when someone feels a certain kind of neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, unwholesome states increase in him and wholesome states diminish,’ that I therefore say:
mn70:10.1 | S: Now, suppose I hadn’t known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced this with wisdom: | T: (none)
mn70:10.2 | S: ‘When someone feels this kind of neutral feeling, unskillful qualities grow and skillful qualities decline.’ | T: (none)
mn70:10.3 | S: Not knowing this, would it be appropriate for me to say: ‘You should give up this kind of neutral feeling’?” | T: ‘Abandon such a kind of neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling.’
mn70:10.4 | S: “No, sir.” | T: (none)
mn70:10.5 | S: “But I have known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced this with wisdom: | T: “If it were unknown by me…But because it is known by me…contacted by wisdom thus:
mn70:10.6 | S: ‘When someone feels this kind of neutral feeling, unskillful qualities grow and skillful qualities decline.’ Since this is so, that’s why I say: ‘You should give up this kind of neutral feeling.’ | T: (none)
mn70:10.7 | S: Now, suppose I hadn’t known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced this with wisdom: | T: (none)
mn70:10.8 | S: ‘When someone feels that kind of neutral feeling, unskillful qualities decline and skillful qualities grow.’ | T: (none)
mn70:10.9 | S: Not knowing this, would it be appropriate for me to say: ‘You should enter and remain in that kind of neutral feeling’?” | T: (none)
mn70:10.10 | S: “No, sir.” | T: (none)
mn70:11.1 | S: “But I have known, seen, understood, realized, and experienced this with wisdom: | T: (none)
mn70:11.2 | S: ‘When someone feels that kind of neutral feeling, unskillful qualities decline and skillful qualities grow.’ Since this is so, that’s why I say: ‘You should enter and remain in that kind of neutral feeling.’ | T: ‘Here, when someone feels another kind of neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, unwholesome states diminish in him and wholesome states increase,’ that I therefore say: ‘Enter upon and abide in such a kind of neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling.’
mn70:12.1 | S: Mendicants, I don’t say that all these mendicants still have work to do with diligence. | T: “Bhikkhus, I do not say of all bhikkhus that they still have work to do with diligence;
mn70:12.2 | S: Nor do I say that all these mendicants have no work to do with diligence. | T: nor do I say of all bhikkhus that they have no more work to do with diligence.
mn70:12.3 | S: I say that mendicants don’t have work to do with diligence if they are perfected, with defilements ended, having completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their heart’s goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and become rightly freed through enlightenment. | T: “I do not say of those bhikkhus who are arahants with taints destroyed, who have lived the holy life, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, reached the true goal, destroyed the fetters of being, and are completely liberated through final knowledge, that they still have work to do with diligence.
mn70:12.4 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn70:12.5 | S: They’ve done their work with diligence. | T: They have done their work with diligence;
mn70:12.6 | S: They’re incapable of being negligent. | T: they are no more capable of being negligent.
mn70:13.1 | S: I say that mendicants still have work to do with diligence if they are trainees, who haven’t achieved their heart’s desire, but live aspiring to the supreme sanctuary from the yoke. | T: “I say of such bhikkhus who are in higher training, whose minds have not yet reached the goal, and who are still aspiring to the supreme security from bondage, that they still have work to do with diligence. Why is that?
mn70:13.2 | S: Why is that? Thinking: | T: Because when those venerable ones make use of suitable resting places and associate with good friends and nurture their spiritual faculties,
mn70:13.3 | S: ‘Hopefully this venerable will frequent appropriate lodgings, associate with good friends, and control their faculties. | T: (none)
mn70:13.4 | S: Then they might realize the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very life, and live having achieved with their own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.’ | T: they may by realising for themselves with direct knowledge here and now enter upon and abide in that supreme goal of the holy life for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from the home life into homelessness.
mn70:13.5 | S: Seeing this fruit of diligence for those mendicants, I say that they still have work to do with diligence. | T: Seeing this fruit of diligence for these bhikkhus, I say that they still have work to do with diligence.
mn70:14.1 | S: Mendicants, these seven individuals are found in the world. | T: “Bhikkhus, there are seven kinds of persons to be found existing in the world.
mn70:14.2 | S: What seven? | T: What seven?
mn70:14.3 | S: One freed both ways, one freed by wisdom, a direct witness, one attained to view, one freed by faith, a follower of teachings, and a follower by faith. | T: They are: one liberated-in-both ways, one liberated-by-wisdom, a body-witness, one attained-to-view, one liberated-by-faith, a Dhamma-follower, and a faith-follower.
mn70:15.1 | S: And what individual is freed both ways? | T: “What kind of person is one liberated-in-both-ways?
mn70:15.2 | S: It’s an individual who has direct meditative experience of the peaceful liberations that are formless, transcending form. And, having seen with wisdom, their defilements have come to an end. | T: Here some person contacts with the body and abides in those liberations that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms, and his taints are destroyed by his seeing with wisdom.
mn70:15.3 | S: This individual is called freed both ways. | T: This kind of person is called one liberated-in-both-ways.
mn70:15.4 | S: And I say that this mendicant has no work to do with diligence. | T: I do not say of such a bhikkhu that he still has work to do with diligence.
mn70:15.5 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn70:15.6 | S: They’ve done their work with diligence. | T: He has done his work with diligence;
mn70:15.7 | S: They’re incapable of being negligent. | T: he is no more capable of being negligent.
mn70:16.1 | S: And what individual is freed by wisdom? | T: “What kind of person is one liberated-by-wisdom?
mn70:16.2 | S: It’s an individual who does not have direct meditative experience of the peaceful liberations that are formless, transcending form. Nevertheless, having seen with wisdom, their defilements have come to an end. | T: Here some person does not contact with the body and abide in those liberations that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms, but his taints are destroyed by his seeing with wisdom.
mn70:16.3 | S: This individual is called freed by wisdom. | T: This kind of person is called one liberated-by-wisdom.
mn70:16.4 | S: I say that this mendicant has no work to do with diligence. | T: I do not say of such a bhikkhu that he still has work to do with diligence.
mn70:16.5 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn70:16.6 | S: They’ve done their work with diligence. | T: He has done his work with diligence;
mn70:16.7 | S: They’re incapable of being negligent. | T: he is no more capable of being negligent.
mn70:17.1 | S: And what individual is a direct witness? | T: “What kind of person is a body-witness?
mn70:17.2 | S: It’s an individual who has direct meditative experience of the peaceful liberations that are formless, transcending form. And, having seen with wisdom, some of their defilements have come to an end. | T: Here some person contacts with the body and abides in those liberations that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms, and some of his taints are destroyed by his seeing with wisdom.
mn70:17.3 | S: This individual is called a direct witness. | T: This kind of person is called a body-witness.
mn70:17.4 | S: I say that this mendicant still has work to do with diligence. | T: I say of such a bhikkhu that he still has work to do with diligence. Why is that?
mn70:17.5 | S: Why is that? Thinking: | T: Because when that venerable one makes use of suitable resting places and associates with good friends and nurtures his spiritual faculties,
mn70:17.6 | S: ‘Hopefully this venerable will frequent appropriate lodgings, associate with good friends, and control their faculties. | T: (none)
mn70:17.7 | S: Then they might realize the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very life, and live having achieved with their own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.’ | T: he may by realising for himself with direct knowledge here and now enter upon and abide in that supreme goal of the holy life for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from the home life into homelessness.
mn70:17.8 | S: Seeing this fruit of diligence for this mendicant, I say that they still have work to do with diligence. | T: Seeing this fruit of diligence for such a bhikkhu, I say that he still has work to do with diligence.
mn70:18.1 | S: And what individual is attained to view? | T: “What kind of person is one attained-to-view?
mn70:18.2 | S: It’s an individual who doesn’t have direct meditative experience of the peaceful liberations that are formless, transcending form. Nevertheless, having seen with wisdom, some of their defilements have come to an end. And they have clearly seen and clearly contemplated with wisdom the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One. | T: Here some person does not contact with the body and abide in those liberations that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms, but some of his taints are destroyed by his seeing with wisdom, and he has reviewed and examined with wisdom the teachings proclaimed by the Tathāgata.
mn70:18.3 | S: This individual is called attained to view. | T: This kind of person is called one attained-to-view.
mn70:18.4 | S: I say that this mendicant also still has work to do with diligence. | T: I say of such a bhikkhu that he still has work to do with diligence. Why is that?
mn70:18.5 | S: Why is that? Thinking: | T: Because when that venerable one…into homelessness.
mn70:18.6 | S: ‘Hopefully this venerable will frequent appropriate lodgings, associate with good friends, and control their faculties. | T: (none)
mn70:18.7 | S: Then they might realize the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very life, and live having achieved with their own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.’ | T: (none)
mn70:18.8 | S: Seeing this fruit of diligence for this mendicant, I say that they still have work to do with diligence. | T: Seeing this fruit of diligence for such a bhikkhu, I say that he still has work to do with diligence.
mn70:19.1 | S: And what individual is freed by faith? | T: “What kind of person is one liberated-by-faith?
mn70:19.2 | S: It’s an individual who doesn’t have direct meditative experience of the peaceful liberations that are formless, transcending form. Nevertheless, having seen with wisdom, some of their defilements have come to an end. And their faith is settled, rooted, and planted in the Realized One. | T: Here some person does not contact with the body and abide in those liberations that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms, but some of his taints are destroyed by his seeing with wisdom, and his faith is planted, rooted, and established in the Tathāgata.
mn70:19.3 | S: This individual is called freed by faith. | T: This kind of person is called one liberated-by-faith.
mn70:19.4 | S: I say that this mendicant also still has work to do with diligence. | T: I say of such a bhikkhu that he still has work to do with diligence. Why is that?
mn70:19.5 | S: Why is that? Thinking: | T: Because when that venerable one …into homelessness.
mn70:19.6 | S: ‘Hopefully this venerable will frequent appropriate lodgings, associate with good friends, and control their faculties. | T: (none)
mn70:19.7 | S: Then they might realize the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very life, and live having achieved with their own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.’ | T: (none)
mn70:19.8 | S: Seeing this fruit of diligence for this mendicant, I say that they still have work to do with diligence. | T: Seeing this fruit of diligence for such a bhikkhu, I say that he still has work to do with diligence.
mn70:20.1 | S: And what individual is a follower of teachings? | T: “What kind of person is a Dhamma-follower?
mn70:20.2 | S: It’s an individual who doesn’t have direct meditative experience of the peaceful liberations that are formless, transcending form. And having seen with wisdom, their defilements have not come to an end. And they accept the teachings proclaimed by the Realized One after deliberating them with a degree of wisdom. And they have the following qualities: | T: Here some person does not contact with the body and abide in those liberations that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms, and his taints are not yet destroyed by his seeing with wisdom, but those teachings proclaimed by the Tathāgata are accepted by him after reflecting on them sufficiently with wisdom. Furthermore, he has these qualities:
mn70:20.3 | S: the faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. | T: the faith faculty, the energy faculty, the mindfulness faculty, the concentration faculty, and the wisdom faculty.
mn70:20.4 | S: This individual is called a follower of teachings. | T: This kind of person is called a Dhamma-follower.
mn70:20.5 | S: I say that this mendicant also still has work to do with diligence. | T: I say of such a bhikkhu that he still has work to do with diligence. Why is that?
mn70:20.6 | S: Why is that? Thinking: | T: Because when that venerable one…into homelessness.
mn70:20.7 | S: ‘Hopefully this venerable will frequent appropriate lodgings, associate with good friends, and control their faculties. | T: (none)
mn70:20.8 | S: Then they might realize the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very life, and live having achieved with their own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.’ | T: (none)
mn70:20.9 | S: Seeing this fruit of diligence for this mendicant, I say that they still have work to do with diligence. | T: Seeing this fruit of diligence for such a bhikkhu, I say that he still has work to do with diligence.
mn70:21.1 | S: And what individual is a follower by faith? | T: “What kind of person is a faith-follower?
mn70:21.2 | S: It’s an individual who doesn’t have direct meditative experience of the peaceful liberations that are formless, transcending form. And having seen with wisdom, their defilements have not come to an end. And they have a degree of faith and fondness for the Realized One. And they have the following qualities: | T: Here some person does not contact with the body and abide in those liberations that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms, and his taints are not yet destroyed by his seeing with wisdom, yet he has sufficient faith in and love for the Tathāgata. Furthermore, he has these qualities:
mn70:21.3 | S: the faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. | T: the faith faculty, the energy faculty, the mindfulness faculty, the concentration faculty, and the wisdom faculty.
mn70:21.4 | S: This individual is called a follower by faith. | T: This kind of person is called a faith-follower.
mn70:21.5 | S: I say that this mendicant also still has work to do with diligence. | T: I say of such a bhikkhu that he still has work to do with diligence. Why is that?
mn70:21.6 | S: Why is that? Thinking: | T: Because when that venerable one makes use of suitable resting places and associates with good friends and nurtures his spiritual faculties,
mn70:21.7 | S: ‘Hopefully this venerable will frequent appropriate lodgings, associate with good friends, and control their faculties. | T: (none)
mn70:21.8 | S: Then they might realize the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very life, and live having achieved with their own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.’ | T: he may by realising for himself with direct knowledge here and now enter upon and abide in that supreme goal of the holy life for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from the home life into homelessness.
mn70:21.9 | S: Seeing this fruit of diligence for this mendicant, I say that they still have work to do with diligence. | T: Seeing this fruit of diligence for such a bhikkhu, I say that he still has work to do with diligence.
mn70:22.1 | S: Mendicants, I don’t say that enlightenment is achieved right away. | T: “Bhikkhus, I do not say that final knowledge is achieved all at once.
mn70:22.2 | S: Rather, enlightenment is achieved by gradual training, progress, and practice. | T: On the contrary, final knowledge is achieved by gradual training, by gradual practice, by gradual progress.
mn70:23.1 | S: And how is enlightenment achieved by gradual training, progress, and practice? | T: “And how is final knowledge achieved by gradual training, gradual practice, gradual progress?
mn70:23.2 | S: It’s when someone in whom faith has arisen approaches a teacher. They pay homage, actively listen, hear the teachings, remember the teachings, examine their meaning, and accept them after deliberation. Then enthusiasm springs up; they make an attempt, weigh up, and strive. Striving, they directly realize the ultimate truth, and see it with penetrating wisdom. | T: Here one who has faith in a teacher visits him; when he visits him, he pays respect to him; when he pays respect to him, he gives ear; one who gives ear hears the Dhamma; having heard the Dhamma, he memorises it; he examines the meaning of the teachings he has memorised; when he examines their meaning, he gains a reflective acceptance of those teachings; when he has gained a reflective acceptance of those teachings, zeal springs up in him; when zeal has sprung up, he applies his will; having applied his will, he scrutinises; having scrutinised, he strives; resolutely striving, he realises with the body the supreme truth and sees it by penetrating it with wisdom.
mn70:24.1 | S: Mendicants, there has not been that faith, | T: “There has not been that faith,
mn70:24.2 | S: that approaching, | T: bhikkhus,
mn70:24.3 | S: that paying homage, | T: and there has not been that visiting, and there has not been that paying of respect,
mn70:24.4 | S: that listening, | T: and there has not been that giving ear,
mn70:24.5 | S: that hearing the teachings, | T: and there has not been that hearing of the Dhamma, and there has not been that memorising of the Dhamma, and there has not been that examination of the meaning,
mn70:24.6 | S: that remembering the teachings, | T: and there has not been that reflective acceptance of the teachings,
mn70:24.7 | S: that examining their meaning, | T: (none)
mn70:24.8 | S: that acceptance after deliberation, | T: (none)
mn70:24.9 | S: that enthusiasm, | T: and there has not been that zeal,
mn70:24.10 | S: that making an attempt, | T: and there has not been that application of will,
mn70:24.11 | S: that weighing up, | T: and there has not been that scrutiny,
mn70:24.12 | S: or that striving. | T: and there has not been that striving.
mn70:24.13 | S: You’re on a bad path, mendicants! You’re practicing the wrong way! | T: Bhikkhus, you have lost your way; bhikkhus, you have been practising the wrong way.
mn70:24.14 | S: How far these futile men have strayed from this teaching and training! | T: Just how far, bhikkhus, have these misguided men strayed from this Doctrine and Discipline?
mn70:25.1 | S: There is an exposition in four statements, which a sensible person would quickly understand when it is recited. | T: “Bhikkhus, there is a four-phrased statement, and when it is recited a wise man would quickly understand it.
mn70:25.2 | S: I shall recite it for you, mendicants. Try to understand it.” | T: I shall recite it to you, bhikkhus. Try to understand it.”
mn70:25.3 | S: “Sir, who are we next to those who understand the teaching?” | T: “Venerable sir, who are we that we should understand the Dhamma?”
mn70:26.1 | S: “Even with a teacher who values things of the flesh, is an heir in things of the flesh, who lives caught up in things of the flesh, you wouldn’t get into such haggling: | T: “Bhikkhus, even with a teacher who is concerned with material things, an heir to material things, attached to material things, such haggling by his disciples would not be proper:
mn70:26.2 | S: ‘If we get this, we’ll do that. If we don’t get this, we won’t do it.’ What then of the Realized One, who lives utterly detached from things of the flesh? | T: ‘If we get this, we will do it; if we don’t get this, we won’t do it’; so what should be said when the teacher is the Tathāgata, who is utterly detached from material things?
mn70:27.1 | S: For a faithful disciple who is practicing to fathom the Teacher’s instructions, this is in line with the teaching: | T: “Bhikkhus, for a faithful disciple who is intent on fathoming the Teacher’s Dispensation, it is natural that he conduct himself thus:
mn70:27.2 | S: ‘The Buddha is my Teacher, I am his disciple. | T: ‘The Blessed One is the Teacher, I am a disciple;
mn70:27.3 | S: The Buddha knows, I do not know.’ | T: the Blessed One knows, I do not know.’
mn70:27.4 | S: For a faithful disciple who is practicing to fathom the Teacher’s instructions, the Teacher’s instructions are nourishing and nutritious. | T: For a faithful disciple who is intent on fathoming the Teacher’s Dispensation, the Teacher’s Dispensation is nourishing and refreshing.
mn70:27.5 | S: For a faithful disciple who is practicing to fathom the Teacher’s instructions, this is in line with the teaching: | T: For a faithful disciple who is intent on fathoming the Teacher’s Dispensation, it is natural that he conduct himself thus:
mn70:27.6 | S: ‘Gladly, let only skin, sinews, and bones remain! Let the flesh and blood waste away in my body! I will not relax my energy until I have achieved what is possible by human strength, energy, and vigor.’ | T: ‘Willingly, let only my skin, sinews, and bones remain, and let the flesh and blood dry up on my body, but my energy shall not be relaxed so long as I have not attained what can be attained by manly strength, manly energy, and manly persistence.’
mn70:27.7 | S: For a faithful disciple who is practicing to fathom the Teacher’s instructions, one of two results can be expected: | T: For a faithful disciple who is intent on fathoming the Teacher’s Dispensation, one of two fruits may be expected:
mn70:27.8 | S: enlightenment in this very life, or if there’s residue left behind, non-return.” | T: either final knowledge here and now or, if there is a trace of clinging left, non-return.”
mn70:27.9 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: That is what the Blessed One said.
mn70:27.10 | S: Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said. | T: The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.

## an10.10
an10.10:1.1 | S: “A mendicant is faithful, but not ethical. | T: (1) “Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu may be endowed with faith but he is not virtuous … …
an10.10:1.2 | S: So they’re incomplete in that respect, | T: (none)
an10.10:1.3 | S: and should fulfill it, thinking: | T: (none)
an10.10:1.4 | S: ‘How can I become faithful and ethical?’ | T: (none)
an10.10:1.5 | S: When the mendicant is faithful and ethical, they’re complete in that respect. | T: (2) …
an10.10:2.1 | S: A mendicant is faithful and ethical, but not learned … | T: endowed with faith and virtuous, but he is not learned …
an10.10:2.2 | S: they’re not a Dhamma speaker … | T: (3) … learned, but not a speaker on the Dhamma … (4) … a speaker on the Dhamma,
an10.10:2.3 | S: they don’t frequent assemblies … | T: but not one who frequents assemblies … (5) … one who frequents assemblies,
an10.10:2.4 | S: they don’t teach Dhamma to the assembly with assurance … | T: but not one who confidently teaches the Dhamma to an assembly … (6) … one who confidently teaches the Dhamma to an assembly,
an10.10:2.5 | S: they’re not an expert in the monastic law … | T: but not an expert on the discipline … (7) … an expert on the discipline,
an10.10:2.6 | S: they don’t recollect their many kinds of past lives … | T: but not one who recollects his manifold past abodes, that is, one birth, two births … as in 6:2 §4 … thus he does not recollect his manifold past abodes with their aspects and details … (8) … one who recollects his manifold past abodes …
an10.10:2.7 | S: they don’t, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, see sentient beings passing away and being reborn … | T: but not one who, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human … as in 6:2 §5 … understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma … (9) … one who, with the divine eye … understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma,
an10.10:2.8 | S: they don’t realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, and live having realized it with their own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements. | T: but not one who, with the destruction of the taints, has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwells in it.
an10.10:2.9 | S: So they’re incomplete in that respect, | T: “Thus he is incomplete with respect to that factor.
an10.10:2.10 | S: and should fulfill it, thinking: | T: He should fulfill that factor, thinking:
an10.10:2.11 | S: ‘How can I become faithful, ethical, and learned, a Dhamma speaker, one who frequents assemblies, one who teaches Dhamma to the assembly with assurance, an expert in the training, one who recollects their many kinds of past lives, one who with clairvoyance that surpasses the human sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn, and one who lives having realized the ending of defilements?’ | T: ‘How can I be endowed with faith … … and also be one who, with the destruction of the taints,
an10.10:3.1 | S: When they are faithful, ethical, and learned, a Dhamma speaker, one who frequents assemblies, one who teaches Dhamma to the assembly with assurance, an expert in the training, one who recollects their many kinds of past lives, one who with clairvoyance that surpasses the human sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn, and one who lives having realized the ending of defilements, | T: has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwells in it?’ (10) “But when a bhikkhu is i endowed with faith, ii virtuous, and iii learned; iv a speaker on the Dhamma; v one who frequents assemblies; vi one who confidently teaches the Dhamma to an assembly; vii an expert on the discipline; viii one who recollects his manifold past abodes … with their aspects and details; ix one who, with the divine eye … understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma; and x one who, with the destruction of the taints, has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwells in it,
an10.10:3.2 | S: they’re complete in that respect. | T: then he is complete with respect to that factor.
an10.10:3.3 | S: A mendicant who possesses these ten qualities is impressive all around, and is complete in every respect.” | T: “A bhikkhu who possesses these ten qualities is one who inspires confidence in all respects and who is complete in all aspects.”

## sn11.24
sn11.24:1.1 | S: At Sāvatthī. | T: At Savatthī.
sn11.24:1.2 | S: Now at that time two mendicants had clashed. | T: Now on that occasion two bhikkhus had a quarrel and one bhikkhu had transgressed against the other.
sn11.24:1.3 | S: One of them transgressed against the other. | T: (none)
sn11.24:1.4 | S: The transgressor confessed to the other mendicant, | T: Then the former bhikkhu confessed his transgression to the other bhikkhu,
sn11.24:1.5 | S: but they didn’t accept it. | T: (none)
sn11.24:1.6 | S: Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. | T: but the latter would not pardon him. Then a number of bhikkhus approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and reported to him what had happened. The Blessed One said:
sn11.24:2.1 | S: “Mendicants, there are two fools. | T: “Bhikkhus, there are two kinds of fools:
sn11.24:2.2 | S: One who doesn’t recognize when they’ve made a mistake. And one who doesn’t properly accept the confession of someone who’s made a mistake. | T: one who does not see a transgression as a transgression; and one who, when another is confessing a transgression, does not pardon him in accordance with the Dhamma.
sn11.24:2.3 | S: These are the two fools. | T: These are the two kinds of fools.
sn11.24:2.4 | S: There are two who are astute. | T: “There are, bhikkhus, two kinds of wise people:
sn11.24:2.5 | S: One who recognizes when they’ve made a mistake. And one who properly accepts the confession of someone who’s made a mistake. | T: one who sees a transgression as a transgression; and one who, when another is confessing a transgression, pardons him in accordance with the Dhamma.
sn11.24:2.6 | S: These are the two who are astute. | T: These are the two kinds of wise people.
sn11.24:3.1 | S: Once upon a time, mendicants, Sakka, lord of gods, guiding the gods of the thirty-three, spoke this verse: | T: “Once in the past, bhikkhus, Sakka, lord of the devas, instructing the Tavatiṁsa devas in the Sudhamma assembly hall, on that occasion recited this verse:
sn11.24:4.1 | S: ‘Control your anger; | T: “‘Bring anger under your control;
sn11.24:4.2 | S: don’t let friendships decay. | T: Do not let your friendships decay.
sn11.24:4.3 | S: Don’t blame the blameless, | T: Do not blame one who is blameless;
sn11.24:4.4 | S: and don’t backbite. | T: Do not utter divisive speech.
sn11.24:4.5 | S: For anger crushes bad people | T: Like a mountain avalanche Anger crushes evil people.’”
sn11.24:4.6 | S: like a mountain.’” | T: (none)

## an10.218
an10.218:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, I don’t say that intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated are eliminated without being experienced. | T: “Bhikkhus, I do not say that there is a termination of volitional kamma that has been done and accumulated so long as one has not experienced its results,
an10.218:1.2 | S: And that may be in this very life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. | T: and that may be in this very life, or in the next rebirth, or on some subsequent occasion.
an10.218:1.3 | S: But in any case, there is no making an end of suffering without experiencing intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated, I say. | T: But I do not say that there is making an end of suffering so long as one has not experienced the results of volitional kamma that has been done and accumulated.
an10.218:2.1 | S: Now, there are three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and result. | T: “As to this, bhikkhus, there is a threefold corruption and failure of bodily kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, having a painful outcome and result;
an10.218:2.2 | S: There are four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and result. | T: a fourfold corruption and failure of verbal kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, having a painful outcome and result;
an10.218:2.3 | S: There are three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and result. | T: and a threefold corruption and failure of mental kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, having a painful outcome and result.
an10.218:3.1 | S: And what are the three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action? … | T: (1)–(10) “And how, bhikkhus, is there a threefold corruption and failure of bodily kamma …
an10.218:3.2 | S: These are the three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action. | T: (none)
an10.218:4.1 | S: And what are the four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action? … | T: (none)
an10.218:4.2 | S: These are the four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action. | T: a fourfold corruption and failure of verbal kamma … …
an10.218:5.1 | S: And what are the three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action? … | T: a threefold corruption and failure of mental kamma? …
an10.218:5.2 | S: These are the three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action. | T: all as in 10:217 … having a painful outcome and result.
an10.218:6.1 | S: When their body breaks up, after death, sentient beings are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell because of these three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action, these four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action, or these three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and result. | T: “It is, bhikkhus, because of the threefold corruption and failure of bodily kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition … or it is because of the fourfold corruption and failure of verbal kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition … or it is because of the threefold corruption and failure of mental kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, that with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
an10.218:7.1 | S: I don’t say that intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated are eliminated without being experienced. | T: “Bhikkhus, I do not say that there is a termination of volitional kamma that has been done and accumulated so long as one has not experienced its results,
an10.218:7.2 | S: And that may be in this very life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. | T: and that may be in this very life, or in the next rebirth, or on some subsequent occasion.
an10.218:7.3 | S: But in any case, there is no making an end of suffering without experiencing intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated, I say. | T: But I do not say that there is making an end of suffering so long as one has not experienced the results of volitional kamma that has been done and accumulated.
an10.218:8.1 | S: Now, there are three kinds of successful bodily action that have skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result. | T: “As to this, bhikkhus, there is a threefold success of bodily kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, having a pleasant outcome and result.
an10.218:8.2 | S: There are four kinds of successful verbal action that have skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result. | T: There is a fourfold success of verbal kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, having a pleasant outcome and result.
an10.218:8.3 | S: There are three kinds of successful mental action that have skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result. | T: There is a threefold success of mental kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, having a pleasant outcome and result.
an10.218:9.1 | S: And what are the three kinds of successful bodily action? … | T: (1)–(10) “And how, bhikkhus, is there a threefold success of bodily kamma …
an10.218:9.2 | S: These are the three kinds of successful bodily action. | T: (none)
an10.218:10.1 | S: And what are the four kinds of successful verbal action? … | T: (none)
an10.218:10.2 | S: These are the four kinds of successful verbal action. | T: a fourfold success of verbal kamma … …
an10.218:11.1 | S: And what are the three kinds of successful mental action? … | T: a threefold success of mental kamma? …
an10.218:11.2 | S: These are the three kinds of successful mental action. | T: all as in 10:217 … having a painful outcome and result.
an10.218:12.1 | S: When their body breaks up, after death, sentient beings are reborn in a good place, in heaven because of these three kinds of successful bodily action, these four kinds of successful verbal action, or these three kinds of successful mental action that have skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result. …” | T: “It is, bhikkhus, because of the threefold success of bodily kamma … or it is because of the fourfold success of verbal kamma … or it is because of the threefold success of mental kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, that with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world. “Bhikkhus, I do not say that there is a termination of volitional kamma that has been done and accumulated so long as one has not experienced its results, and that may be in this very life, or in the next rebirth, or on some subsequent occasion. But I do not say that there is making an end of suffering so long as one has not experienced the results of volitional kamma that has been done and accumulated.”

