## sn22.55
sn22.55:1.1 | S: At Sāvatthī. | T: At Savatthi.
sn22.55:1.2 | S: There the Buddha expressed this heartfelt sentiment: | T: There the Blessed One uttered this inspired utterance:
sn22.55:1.3 | S: “‘It might not be, and it might not be mine. It will not be, and it will not be mine.’ | T: “‘It might not be, and it might not be for me; it will not be, and it will not be for me’:
sn22.55:1.4 | S: A mendicant who makes such a resolution can cut off the lower fetters.” | T: resolving thus, a bhikkhu can cut off the lower fetters.”
sn22.55:1.5 | S: When he said this, one of the mendicants said to the Buddha, | T: When this was said, a certain bhikkhu said to the Blessed One:
sn22.55:1.6 | S: “But sir, how | T: “But how, venerable sir,
sn22.55:1.7 | S: can a mendicant who makes such a resolution cut off the lower fetters?” | T: can a bhikkhu, resolving thus: ‘It might not be, and it might not be for me; it will not be, and it will not be for me,’ cut off the lower fetters?”
sn22.55:2.1 | S: “Mendicant, take an unlearned ordinary person who has not seen the noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in their teaching. They’ve not seen true persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in their teaching. | T: “Here, bhikkhu, the uninstructed worldling, who is not a seer of the noble ones …
sn22.55:2.2 | S: They regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form. | T: regards form as self …
sn22.55:2.3 | S: They regard feeling … | T: (none)
sn22.55:2.4 | S: perception … | T: (none)
sn22.55:2.5 | S: choices … | T: (none)
sn22.55:2.6 | S: consciousness as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in consciousness. | T: or self as in consciousness.
sn22.55:3.1 | S: They don’t truly understand form—which is impermanent—as impermanent. | T: “He does not understand as it really is impermanent form as ‘impermanent form’ …
sn22.55:3.2 | S: They don’t truly understand feeling … | T: impermanent feeling as ‘impermanent feeling’ …
sn22.55:3.3 | S: perception … | T: impermanent perception as ‘impermanent perception’ …
sn22.55:3.4 | S: choices … | T: impermanent volitional formations as ‘impermanent volitional formations’ …
sn22.55:3.5 | S: consciousness—which is impermanent—as impermanent. | T: impermanent consciousness as ‘impermanent consciousness.’
sn22.55:4.1 | S: They don’t truly understand form—which is suffering—as suffering. | T: “He does not understand as it really is painful form as ‘painful form’ …
sn22.55:4.2 | S: They don’t truly understand feeling … | T: painful feeling as ‘painful feeling’ …
sn22.55:4.3 | S: perception … | T: painful perception as ‘painful perception’ …
sn22.55:4.4 | S: choices … | T: painful volitional formations as ‘painful volitional formations’ …
sn22.55:4.5 | S: consciousness—which is suffering—as suffering. | T: painful consciousness as ‘painful consciousness.’
sn22.55:5.1 | S: They don’t truly understand form—which is not-self—as not-self. | T: “He does not understand as it really is selfless form as ‘selfless form’ …
sn22.55:5.2 | S: They don’t truly understand feeling … | T: selfless feeling as ‘selfless feeling’ …
sn22.55:5.3 | S: perception … | T: selfless perception as ‘selfless perception’ …
sn22.55:5.4 | S: choices … | T: selfless volitional formations as ‘selfless volitional formations’ …
sn22.55:5.5 | S: consciousness—which is not-self—as not-self. | T: selfless consciousness as ‘selfless consciousness.’
sn22.55:6.1 | S: They don’t truly understand form—which is conditioned—as conditioned. | T: “He does not understand as it really is conditioned form as ‘conditioned form’ …
sn22.55:6.2 | S: They don’t truly understand feeling … | T: conditioned feeling as ‘conditioned feeling’ …
sn22.55:6.3 | S: perception … | T: conditioned perception as ‘conditioned perception’ …
sn22.55:6.4 | S: choices … | T: conditioned volitional formations as ‘conditioned volitional formations’ …
sn22.55:6.5 | S: consciousness—which is conditioned—as conditioned. | T: conditioned consciousness as ‘conditioned consciousness.’
sn22.55:6.6 | S: They don’t truly understand that form will vanish. | T: “He does not understand as it really is: ‘Form will be exterminated’ …
sn22.55:6.7 | S: They don’t truly understand that feeling … | T: ‘Feeling will be exterminated’ …
sn22.55:6.8 | S: perception … | T: ‘Perception will be exterminated’ …
sn22.55:6.9 | S: choices … | T: ‘Volitional formations will be exterminated’ …
sn22.55:6.10 | S: consciousness will vanish. | T: ‘Consciousness will be exterminated.’
sn22.55:7.1 | S: But a learned noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve seen true persons, and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the true persons. | T: “The instructed noble disciple, bhikkhu, who is a seer of the noble ones …
sn22.55:7.2 | S: They don’t regard form as self … | T: does not regard form as self …
sn22.55:7.3 | S: They don’t regard feeling … | T: (none)
sn22.55:7.4 | S: perception … | T: (none)
sn22.55:7.5 | S: choices … | T: (none)
sn22.55:7.6 | S: consciousness as self. | T: or self as in consciousness.
sn22.55:8.1 | S: They truly understand form—which is impermanent—as impermanent. | T: “He understands as it really is impermanent form as ‘impermanent form’ …
sn22.55:8.2 | S: They truly understand feeling … | T: (none)
sn22.55:8.3 | S: perception … | T: impermanent consciousness as
sn22.55:8.4 | S: choices … | T: (none)
sn22.55:8.5 | S: consciousness—which is impermanent—as impermanent. | T: ‘impermanent consciousness.’
sn22.55:8.6 | S: They truly understand form … feeling … perception … choices … consciousness—which is suffering—as suffering. | T: “He understands as it really is painful form as ‘painful form’ … painful consciousness as ‘painful consciousness.’
sn22.55:8.7 | S: They truly understand form … feeling … perception … choices … consciousness—which is not-self—as not-self. | T: “He understands as it really is selfless form as ‘selfless form’ … selfless consciousness as ‘selfless consciousness.’
sn22.55:8.8 | S: They truly understand form … feeling … perception … choices … consciousness—which is conditioned—as conditioned. | T: “He understands as it really is conditioned form as ‘conditioned form’ … conditioned consciousness as ‘conditioned consciousness. ’
sn22.55:8.9 | S: They truly understand that form will vanish. | T: “He understands as it really is: ‘Form will be exterminated’ …
sn22.55:8.10 | S: They truly understand that feeling … | T: ‘Feeling will be exterminated’ …
sn22.55:8.11 | S: perception … | T: ‘Perception will be exterminated’ …
sn22.55:8.12 | S: choices … | T: ‘Volitional formations will be exterminated’ …
sn22.55:8.13 | S: consciousness will vanish. | T: ‘Consciousness will be exterminated.’
sn22.55:9.1 | S: It’s because of the vanishing of form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness that a mendicant who makes such a resolution— | T: “With the extermination of form, feeling, perception, volitional formations, and consciousness, that bhikkhu, resolving thus: ‘It might not be, and it might not be for me; it will not be, and it will not be for me,’
sn22.55:9.2 | S: ‘It might not be, and it might not be mine. It will not be, and it will not be mine’— | T: (none)
sn22.55:9.3 | S: can cut off the lower fetters.” | T: can cut off the lower fetters.”
sn22.55:9.4 | S: “Sir, you say that a mendicant who makes such a resolution can cut off the lower fetters. | T: “Resolving thus, venerable sir, a bhikkhu can cut off the lower fetters.
sn22.55:10.1 | S: But how are they to know and see in order to end the defilements without delay?” | T: But how should one know, how should one see, for the immediate destruction of the taints to occur?”
sn22.55:10.2 | S: “Mendicant, an unlearned ordinary person worries about things that aren’t a worry. | T: “Here, bhikkhu, the uninstructed worldling becomes frightened over an unfrightening matter.
sn22.55:10.3 | S: For an unlearned ordinary person worries: | T: For this is frightening to the uninstructed worldling:
sn22.55:10.4 | S: ‘It might not be, and it might not be mine. It will not be, and it will not be mine.’ | T: ‘It might not be, and it might not be for me; it will not be, and it will not be for me.’
sn22.55:11.1 | S: A learned noble disciple doesn’t worry about things that aren’t a worry. | T: But the instructed noble disciple does not become frightened over an unfrightening matter.
sn22.55:11.2 | S: For a learned noble disciple doesn’t worry: | T: For this is not frightening to the noble disciple:
sn22.55:11.3 | S: ‘It might not be, and it might not be mine. It will not be, and it will not be mine.’ | T: ‘It might not be, and it might not be for me; it will not be, and it will not be for me.’
sn22.55:11.4 | S: Should consciousness involved with form, supported by form, established on form continue to remain, with a sprinkling of relishing it would grow, increase, and mature. | T: “Consciousness, bhikkhu, while standing, might stand engaged with form …
sn22.55:11.5 | S: Or should consciousness involved with feeling remain … | T: engaged with feeling …
sn22.55:11.6 | S: Or should consciousness involved with perception remain … | T: engaged with perception …
sn22.55:11.7 | S: Or should consciousness involved with choices, supported by choices, established on choices continue to remain, with a sprinkling of relishing it would grow, increase, and mature. | T: engaged with volitional formations; based upon volitional formations, established upon volitional formations, with a sprinkling of delight, it might come to growth, increase, and expansion.
sn22.55:12.1 | S: Suppose, mendicant, you were to say: | T: “Bhikkhu, though someone might say:
sn22.55:12.2 | S: ‘Apart from form, feeling, perception, and choices, I will describe the coming and going of consciousness, its passing away and reappearing, its growth, increase, and maturity.’ That is not possible. | T: ‘Apart from form, apart from feeling, apart from perception, apart from volitional formations, I will make known the coming and going of consciousness, its passing away and rebirth, its growth, increase, and expansion’—that is impossible.
sn22.55:13.1 | S: If a mendicant has given up greed for the form element, the support is cut off, and there is no establishment of consciousness. | T: “Bhikkhu, if a bhikkhu has abandoned lust for the form element, with the abandoning of lust the basis is cut off: there is no support for the establishing of consciousness.
sn22.55:13.2 | S: If a mendicant has given up greed for the feeling element … | T: If he has abandoned lust for the feeling element …
sn22.55:13.3 | S: perception element … | T: for the perception element …
sn22.55:13.4 | S: choices element … | T: for the volitional formations element …
sn22.55:13.5 | S: consciousness element, the support is cut off, and there is no establishment of consciousness. | T: for the consciousness element, with the abandoning of lust the basis is cut off: there is no support for the establishing of consciousness.
sn22.55:13.6 | S: Since that consciousness does not become established and does not grow, not making choices, it is freed. | T: “When that consciousness is unestablished, not coming to growth, nongenerative, it is liberated.
sn22.55:13.7 | S: Being free, it’s stable. Being stable, it’s content. Being content, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished. | T: By being liberated, it is steady; by being steady, it is content; by being content, he is not agitated. Being unagitated, he personally attains Nibbāna.
sn22.55:13.8 | S: They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended … there is nothing further for this place.’ | T: He understands: ‘Destroyed is birth, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more for this state of being.’
sn22.55:13.9 | S: The ending of the defilements without delay is for one who knows and sees this.” | T: “It is, bhikkhu, for one who knows thus, for one who sees thus, that the immediate destruction of the taints occurs.”

## sn12.11
sn12.11:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
sn12.11:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. … | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anathapiṇḍika’s Park….
sn12.11:1.3 | S: “Mendicants, these four fuels maintain sentient beings that have been born and help those about to be born. | T: “Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of nutriment for the maintenance of beings that have already come to be and for the assistance of those about to come to be.
sn12.11:1.4 | S: What four? | T: What four?
sn12.11:1.5 | S: Edible food, whether solid or subtle; contact is the second, mental intention the third, and consciousness the fourth. | T: The nutriment edible food, gross or subtle; second, contact; third, mental volition; fourth, consciousness.
sn12.11:1.6 | S: These are the four fuels that maintain sentient beings that have been born and help those about to be born. | T: These are the four kinds of nutriment for the maintenance of beings that have already come to be and for the assistance of those about to come to be.
sn12.11:2.1 | S: What is the source, origin, birthplace, and inception of these four fuels? | T: “Bhikkhus, these four kinds of nutriment have what as their source, what as their origin, from what are they born and produced?
sn12.11:2.2 | S: Craving. | T: These four kinds of nutriment have craving as their source,
sn12.11:2.3 | S: And what is the source, origin, birthplace, and inception of craving? | T: craving as their origin; they are born and produced from craving. “And this craving has what as its source, what as its origin, from what is it born and produced?
sn12.11:2.4 | S: Feeling. | T: This craving has feeling as its source, feeling as its origin; it is born and produced from feeling. “And this feeling has what as its source…?
sn12.11:2.5 | S: And what is the source of feeling? | T: Feeling has contact as its source….
sn12.11:2.6 | S: Contact. | T: (none)
sn12.11:2.7 | S: And what is the source of contact? | T: And this contact has what as its source…?
sn12.11:2.8 | S: The six sense fields. | T: Contact has the six sense bases as its source…. And these six sense bases have what as their source…?
sn12.11:2.9 | S: And what is the source of the six sense fields? | T: The six sense bases have name-and-form as their source….
sn12.11:2.10 | S: Name and form. | T: (none)
sn12.11:2.11 | S: And what is the source of name and form? | T: And this name-and-form has what as its source…? Name-and-form has consciousness as its source….
sn12.11:2.12 | S: Consciousness. | T: And this consciousness has what as its source…?
sn12.11:2.13 | S: And what is the source of consciousness? | T: Consciousness has volitional formations as its source….
sn12.11:2.14 | S: Choices. | T: (none)
sn12.11:2.15 | S: And what is the source of choices? | T: And these volitional formations have what as their source, what as their origin, from what are they born and produced?
sn12.11:2.16 | S: Ignorance. | T: Volitional formations have ignorance as their source, ignorance as their origin; they are born and produced from ignorance.
sn12.11:3.1 | S: And so, mendicants, ignorance is a requirement for choices. | T: “Thus, bhikkhus, with ignorance as condition, volitional formations come to be;
sn12.11:3.2 | S: Choices are a requirement for consciousness. … | T: with volitional formations as condition, consciousness….
sn12.11:3.3 | S: That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. | T: Such is the origin of this whole mass of suffering.
sn12.11:3.4 | S: When ignorance fades away and ceases with no residue left behind, choices cease. | T: But with the remainderless fading away and cessation of ignorance comes cessation of volitional formations; with the cessation of volitional formations,
sn12.11:3.5 | S: When choices cease, consciousness ceases. … | T: cessation of consciousness….
sn12.11:3.6 | S: That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.” | T: Such is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering.”

## an4.51
an4.51:1.1 | S: At Sāvatthī. | T: “Bhikkhus,
an4.51:1.2 | S: “Mendicants, there are these four kinds of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness. They nurture happiness and are conducive to heaven, ripening in happiness and leading to heaven. They lead to what is likable, desirable, agreeable, to welfare and happiness. | T: there are these four streams of merit, streams of the wholesome, nutriments of happiness—heavenly, ripening in happiness, conducive to heaven—that lead to what is wished for, desired, and agreeable, to one’s welfare and happiness.
an4.51:1.3 | S: What four? | T: What four?
an4.51:1.4 | S: When a mendicant enters and remains in a limitless immersion of the heart while using a robe, the overflowing of merit for the donor is limitless … | T: “(1) When a bhikkhu enters and dwells in a measureless concentration of mind while using a robe that one has given him, one acquires a measureless stream of merit, stream of the wholesome, a nutriment of happiness … that leads … to one’s welfare and happiness.
an4.51:2.1 | S: When a mendicant enters and remains in a limitless immersion of the heart while eating almsfood, the overflowing of merit for the donor is limitless … | T: (2) When a bhikkhu enters and dwells in a measureless concentration of mind while using almsfood that one has given him, one acquires a measureless stream of merit, stream of the wholesome, a nutriment of happiness … that leads … to one’s welfare and happiness.
an4.51:3.1 | S: When a mendicant enters and remains in a limitless immersion of the heart while using lodgings, the overflowing of merit for the donor is limitless … | T: (3) When a bhikkhu enters and dwells in a measureless concentration of mind while using a lodging that one has given him, one acquires a measureless stream of merit, stream of the wholesome, a nutriment of happiness … that leads … to one’s welfare and happiness.
an4.51:4.1 | S: When a mendicant enters and remains in a limitless immersion of the heart while using medicines and supplies for the sick, the overflowing of merit for the donor is limitless … | T: (4) When a bhikkhu enters and dwells in a measureless concentration of mind while using medicines and provisions for the sick that one has given him, one acquires a measureless stream of merit, stream of the wholesome, a nutriment of happiness … that leads to one’s welfare and happiness.
an4.51:4.2 | S: These are the four kinds of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness. They nurture happiness and are conducive to heaven, ripening in happiness and leading to heaven. They lead to what is likable, desirable, agreeable, to welfare and happiness. | T: “These are the four streams of merit, streams of the wholesome, nutriments of happiness—heavenly, ripening in happiness, conducive to heaven—that lead to what is wished for, desired, and agreeable, to one’s welfare and happiness.
an4.51:5.1 | S: When a noble disciple has these four kinds of overflowing merit and goodness, it’s not easy to grasp how much merit they have by saying that this is the extent of their overflowing merit … that leads to happiness. It’s simply reckoned as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of merit. | T: “When, bhikkhus, a noble disciple possesses these four streams of merit, streams of the wholesome, it is not easy to measure his merit thus: ‘Just so much is his stream of merit, stream of the wholesome, nutriment of happiness … that leads to … one’s welfare and happiness’; rather, it is reckoned simply as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of merit.
an4.51:6.1 | S: It’s like trying to grasp how much water is in the ocean. It’s not easy to say how many gallons, how many hundreds, thousands, hundreds of thousands of gallons there are. It’s simply reckoned as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of water. | T: “Bhikkhus, just as it is not easy to measure the water in the great ocean thus: ‘There are so many gallons of water,’ or ‘There are so many hundreds of gallons of water,’ or ‘There are so many thousands of gallons of water,’ or ‘There are so many hundreds of thousands of gallons of water,’ but rather it is reckoned simply as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of water;
an4.51:6.2 | S: In the same way, when a noble disciple has these four kinds of overflowing merit it’s simply reckoned as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of merit. | T: so too, when a noble disciple possesses these four streams of merit … it is reckoned simply as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of merit.”
an4.51:7.1 | S: Hosts of people use the rivers, | T: Just as the many rivers used by the hosts of people,
an4.51:7.2 | S: and though the rivers are many, | T: (none)
an4.51:7.3 | S: all reach the great deep, the boundless ocean, | T: flowing downstream, reach the ocean, the great mass of water, the boundless sea,
an4.51:7.4 | S: the cruel sea that’s home to precious gems. | T: the fearsome receptacle of heaps of gems;
an4.51:8.1 | S: In the same way, when a person gives <j>food, drink, and clothes; | T: so the streams of merit reach the wise man who is a giver of food, drink, and cloth;
an4.51:8.2 | S: and they’re a giver of beds, seats, and mats— | T: they reach the donor of beds, seats, and covers
an4.51:8.3 | S: the streams of merit reach that astute person, | T: (none)
an4.51:8.4 | S: as the rivers bring their waters to the sea.” | T: like rivers carrying their waters to the sea.

## an5.24
an5.24:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a vital condition for right immersion. | T: “Bhikkhus, (1) for an immoral person, for one deficient in virtuous behavior, (2) right concentration lacks its proximate cause.
an5.24:1.2 | S: When there is no right immersion, one who lacks right immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true knowledge and vision. | T: When there is no right concentration, for one deficient in right concentration, (3) the knowledge and vision of things as they really are lacks its proximate cause.
an5.24:1.3 | S: When there is no true knowledge and vision, one who lacks true knowledge and vision has destroyed a vital condition for disillusionment and dispassion. | T: When there is no knowledge and vision of things as they really are, for one deficient in the knowledge and vision of things as they really are, (4) disenchantment and dispassion lack their proximate cause.
an5.24:1.4 | S: When there is no disillusionment and dispassion, one who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom. | T: When there is no disenchantment and dispassion, for one deficient in disenchantment and dispassion, (5) the knowledge and vision of liberation lacks its proximate cause.
an5.24:1.5 | S: Suppose there was a tree that lacked branches and foliage. | T: “Suppose there is a tree deficient in branches and foliage.
an5.24:1.6 | S: Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would not grow to fullness. | T: Then its shoots do not grow to fullness; also its bark, softwood, and heartwood do not grow to fullness.
an5.24:1.7 | S: In the same way, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a vital condition for right immersion. | T: So too, for an immoral person, one deficient in virtuous behavior, right concentration lacks its proximate cause.
an5.24:1.8 | S: When there is no right immersion, one who lacks right immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true knowledge and vision. | T: When there is no right concentration …
an5.24:1.9 | S: When there is no true knowledge and vision, one who lacks true knowledge and vision has destroyed a vital condition for disillusionment and dispassion. | T: (none)
an5.24:1.10 | S: When there is no disillusionment and dispassion, one who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom. | T: the knowledge and vision of liberation lacks its proximate cause.
an5.24:2.1 | S: An ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital condition for right immersion. | T: “Bhikkhus, (1) for a virtuous person, for one whose behavior is virtuous, (2) right concentration possesses its proximate cause.
an5.24:2.2 | S: When there is right immersion, one who has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital condition for true knowledge and vision. | T: When there is right concentration, for one possessing right concentration, (3) the knowledge and vision of things as they really are possesses its proximate cause.
an5.24:2.3 | S: When there is true knowledge and vision, one who has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has fulfilled a vital condition for disillusionment and dispassion. | T: When there is the knowledge and vision of things as they really are, for one possessing the knowledge and vision of things as they really are, (4) disenchantment and dispassion possess their proximate cause.
an5.24:2.4 | S: When there is disillusionment and dispassion, one who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom. | T: When there is disenchantment and dispassion, for one possessing disenchantment and dispassion, (5) the knowledge and vision of liberation possesses its proximate cause.
an5.24:2.5 | S: Suppose there was a tree that was complete with branches and foliage. Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would all grow to fullness. | T: “Suppose there is a tree possessing branches and foliage. Then its shoots grow to fullness; also its bark, softwood, and heartwood grow to fullness.
an5.24:2.6 | S: In the same way, an ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital condition for right immersion. | T: So too, for a virtuous person, one whose behavior is virtuous, right concentration possesses its proximate cause.
an5.24:2.7 | S: When there is right immersion, one who has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital condition for true knowledge and vision. | T: When there is right concentration …
an5.24:2.8 | S: When there is true knowledge and vision, one who has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has fulfilled a vital condition for disillusionment and dispassion. | T: (none)
an5.24:2.9 | S: When there is disillusionment and dispassion, one who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.” | T: the knowledge and vision of liberation possesses its proximate cause.”

## sn45.180
sn45.180:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, there are five higher fetters. | T: “Bhikkhus, there are these five higher fetters.
sn45.180:1.2 | S: What five? | T: What five?
sn45.180:1.3 | S: Desire for rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. | T: Lust for form, lust for the formless, conceit, restlessness, ignorance.
sn45.180:1.4 | S: These are the five higher fetters. | T: These are the five higher fetters.
sn45.180:1.5 | S: The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher fetters. | T: The Noble Eightfold Path is to be developed for direct knowledge of these five higher fetters, for the full understanding of them, for their utter destruction, for their abandoning.
sn45.180:1.6 | S: What is the noble eightfold path? | T: “What Noble Eightfold Path?
sn45.180:1.7 | S: It’s when a mendicant develops right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. | T: Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu develops right view … right concentration, which is based upon seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, maturing in release.
sn45.180:1.8 | S: This is the noble eightfold path that should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher fetters.” | T: This Noble Eightfold Path is to be developed for direct knowledge of these five higher fetters, for the full understanding of them, for their utter destruction, for their abandoning.
sn45.180:2.1 | S: “Mendicants, there are five higher fetters. | T: “Bhikkhus, there are these five higher fetters.
sn45.180:2.2 | S: What five? | T: What five?…
sn45.180:2.3 | S: Desire for rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. | T: (none)
sn45.180:2.4 | S: These are the five higher fetters. | T: …
sn45.180:2.5 | S: The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher fetters. | T: The Noble Eightfold Path is to be developed for direct knowledge of these five higher fetters, for the full understanding of them, for their utter destruction, for their abandoning.
sn45.180:2.6 | S: What is the noble eightfold path? | T: “What Noble Eightfold Path?
sn45.180:2.7 | S: It’s when a mendicant develops right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which culminate in the removal of greed, hate, and delusion …” | T: Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu develops right view … right concentration, which has as its final goal the removal of lust, the removal of hatred, the removal of delusion …
sn45.180:2.8 | S: “… whose objective, destination, and culmination is freedom from death …” | T: which has the Deathless as its ground, the Deathless as its destination, the Deathless as its final goal …
sn45.180:2.9 | S: “… which slant, slope, and incline to extinguishment. | T: which slants, slopes, and inclines towards Nibbāna.
sn45.180:2.10 | S: This is the noble eightfold path that should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher fetters.” | T: This Noble Eightfold Path is to be developed for direct knowledge of these five higher fetters, for the full understanding of them, for their utter destruction, for their abandoning.”
sn45.180:6.6 | S: The Linked Discourses on the Path, the first section. | T: (none)

## sn56.21
sn56.21:1.1 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Vajjis at the village of Koṭi. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Vajjians at Koṭigama.
sn56.21:1.2 | S: There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: | T: There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus:
sn56.21:1.3 | S: “Mendicants, due to not understanding and not penetrating four noble truths, both you and I have wandered and transmigrated for such a very long time. | T: “Bhikkhus, it is because of not understanding and not penetrating the Four Noble Truths that you and I have roamed and wandered through this long course of saṁsara. What four? “It is, bhikkhus, because of not understanding and not penetrating the noble truth of suffering that you and I have roamed and wandered through this long course of saṁsara.
sn56.21:2.1 | S: What four? | T: (none)
sn56.21:2.2 | S: The noble truths of suffering, | T: It is because of not understanding and not penetrating the noble truth of the origin of suffering …
sn56.21:2.3 | S: the origin of suffering, | T: (none)
sn56.21:2.4 | S: the cessation of suffering, | T: the noble truth of the cessation of suffering …
sn56.21:2.5 | S: and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. | T: the noble truth of the way leading to the cessation of suffering that you and I have roamed and wandered through this long course of saṁsara.
sn56.21:2.6 | S: These noble truths of suffering, origin, cessation, and the path have been understood and comprehended. Craving for continued existence has been cut off; the leash to existence is ended; now there’ll be no more future lives.” | T: “That noble truth of suffering, bhikkhus, has been understood and penetrated. That noble truth of the origin of suffering has been understood and penetrated. That noble truth of the cessation of suffering has been understood and penetrated. That noble truth of the way leading to the cessation of suffering has been understood and penetrated. Craving for existence has been cut off; the conduit to existence has been destroyed; now there is no more renewed existence.”
sn56.21:3.1 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: This is what the Blessed One said.
sn56.21:3.2 | S: Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: | T: Having said this, the Fortunate One, the Teacher, further said this:
sn56.21:4.1 | S: “Because of not truly seeing | T: “Because of not seeing as they are
sn56.21:4.2 | S: the four noble truths, | T: The Four Noble Truths,
sn56.21:4.3 | S: we have transmigrated for a long time | T: We have wandered through the long course
sn56.21:4.4 | S: from one rebirth to the next. | T: In the various kinds of births.
sn56.21:5.1 | S: But now that these truths have been seen, | T: “Now these truths have been seen;
sn56.21:5.2 | S: the leash to existence is eradicated. | T: The conduit to existence is severed;
sn56.21:5.3 | S: The root of suffering is cut off, | T: Cut off is the root of suffering:
sn56.21:5.4 | S: now there’ll be no more future lives.” | T: Now there is no more renewed existence.”

## sn56.46
sn56.46:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, the boundless gloom of interstellar space is so utterly dark that even the luminosity of the moon and the sun, so mighty and powerful, makes no impression.” | T: “Bhikkhus, there are world interstices, vacant and abysmal regions of blinding darkness and gloom, where the light of the sun and moon, so powerful and mighty, does not reach.”
sn56.46:2.1 | S: When he said this, one of the mendicants said to the Buddha, | T: When this was said, a certain bhikkhu said to the Blessed One:
sn56.46:2.2 | S: “Sir, that darkness really is mighty, so very mighty. | T: “That darkness, venerable sir, is indeed great; that darkness is indeed very great.
sn56.46:2.3 | S: Is there any other darkness more mighty and terrifying than this one?” | T: But is there, venerable sir, any other darkness greater and more frightful than that one?”
sn56.46:2.4 | S: “There is, mendicant.” | T: “There is, bhikkhu.”
sn56.46:3.1 | S: “But sir, what is it?” | T: “But what, venerable sir, is that darkness greater and more frightful than that one?”
sn56.46:3.2 | S: “There are ascetics and brahmins who don’t truly understand about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. | T: “Those ascetics and brahmins, bhikkhu, who do not understand as it really is: ‘This is suffering’; who do not understand as it really is: ‘This is the origin of suffering’; who do not understand as it really is: ‘This is the cessation of suffering’; who do not understand as it really is: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering’—
sn56.46:3.3 | S: They take pleasure in choices that lead to rebirth … | T: they delight in volitional formations that lead to birth, in volitional formations that lead to aging, in volitional formations that lead to death, in volitional formations that lead to sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair. Delighting in such volitional formations, they generate volitional formations that lead to birth, generate volitional formations that lead to aging, generate volitional formations that lead to death, generate volitional formations that lead to sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair.
sn56.46:3.4 | S: They continue to make such choices … | T: (none)
sn56.46:3.5 | S: Having made such choices, they fall into the darkness of rebirth, old age, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. | T: Having generated such volitional formations, they tumble into the darkness of birth, tumble into the darkness of aging, tumble into the darkness of death, tumble into the darkness of sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair.
sn56.46:3.6 | S: They’re not freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. | T: They are not freed from birth, aging, and death; not freed from sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair;
sn56.46:3.7 | S: They’re not freed from suffering, I say. | T: not freed from suffering, I say.
sn56.46:4.1 | S: There are ascetics and brahmins who truly understand about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. | T: “But, bhikkhu, those ascetics and brahmins who understand as it really is: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering’—
sn56.46:4.2 | S: They don’t take pleasure in choices that lead to rebirth … | T: they do not delight in volitional formations that lead to birth, nor in volitional formations that lead to aging, nor in volitional formations that lead to death, nor in volitional formations that lead to sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair. Not delighting in such volitional formations, they do not generate volitional formations that lead to birth, nor generate volitional formations that lead to aging, nor generate volitional formations that lead to death, nor generate volitional formations that lead to sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair.
sn56.46:4.3 | S: They stop making such choices … | T: (none)
sn56.46:4.4 | S: Having stopped making such choices, they don’t fall into the darkness of rebirth, old age, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. | T: Not having generated such volitional formations, they do not tumble into the darkness of birth, nor tumble into the darkness of aging, nor tumble into the darkness of death, nor tumble into the darkness of sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair.
sn56.46:4.5 | S: They’re freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. | T: They are freed from birth, aging, and death; freed from sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair;
sn56.46:4.6 | S: They’re freed from suffering, I say. | T: freed from suffering, I say.
sn56.46:5.1 | S: That’s why you should practice meditation …” | T: “Therefore, bhikkhus, an exertion should be made to understand: ‘This is suffering.’… An exertion should be made to understand: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’”

## mn52
mn52:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
mn52:1.2 | S: At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near Vesālī in the little village of Beluva. | T: On one occasion the Venerable Ānanda was living at Beluvagāmaka near Vesālī.
mn52:1.3 | S: Now at that time the householder Dasama, a wealthy citizen, had arrived at Pāṭaliputta on some business. | T: Now on that occasion the householder Dasama of Aṭṭhakanāgara had arrived at Pāṭaliputta for some business or other.
mn52:2.1 | S: He went to the Chicken Monastery, approached a certain mendicant, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, | T: Then he went to a certain bhikkhu in Kukkuṭa’s Park, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and asked him:
mn52:2.2 | S: “Sir, where is Venerable Ānanda now staying? | T: “Where does the venerable Ānanda live now, venerable sir?
mn52:2.3 | S: For I want to see him.” | T: I wish to see the venerable Ānanda.”
mn52:2.4 | S: “Householder, Venerable Ānanda is staying near Vesālī in the little village of Beluva.” | T: “The venerable Ānanda is living at Beluvagāmaka near Vesālī, householder.”
mn52:3.1 | S: Then the householder Dasama, having concluded his business there, went to the little village of Beluva in Vesālī to see Ānanda. He bowed, sat down to one side, and said to Ānanda: | T: When the householder Dasama had completed his business at Pāṭaliputta, he went to the venerable Ānanda at Beluvagāmaka near Vesālī. After paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and asked him:
mn52:3.2 | S: “Honorable Ānanda, is there one thing that has been rightly explained by the Blessed One—who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha—practicing which a diligent, keen, and resolute mendicant’s mind is freed, their defilements are ended, and they arrive at the supreme sanctuary from the yoke?” | T: “Venerable Ānanda, has any one thing been proclaimed by the Blessed One who knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened, wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute, his unliberated mind comes to be liberated, his undestroyed taints come to be destroyed, and he attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not attained before?”
mn52:3.3 | S: “There is, householder.” | T: “There is, householder, indeed one such thing proclaimed by the Blessed One.”
mn52:3.4 | S: “And what is that one thing?” | T: “What is that one thing, venerable Ānanda?”
mn52:4.1 | S: “Householder, it’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: “Here, householder, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
mn52:4.2 | S: Then they reflect: | T: He considers this and understands it thus:
mn52:4.3 | S: ‘Even this first absorption is produced by choices and intentions.’ | T: ‘This first jhāna is conditioned and volitionally produced.
mn52:4.4 | S: They understand: ‘But whatever is produced by choices and intentions is impermanent and liable to cessation.’ | T: But whatever is conditioned and volitionally produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.’
mn52:4.5 | S: Abiding in that they attain the ending of defilements. | T: If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints.
mn52:4.6 | S: If they don’t attain the ending of defilements, with the ending of the five lower fetters they’re reborn spontaneously, because of their passion and love for that meditation. They are extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. | T: But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints because of that desire for the Dhamma, that delight in the Dhamma, then with the destruction of the five lower fetters he becomes one due to reappear spontaneously in the Pure Abodes and there attain final Nibbāna without ever returning from that world.
mn52:4.7 | S: This is one thing that has been rightly explained by the Blessed One—who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha—practicing which a diligent, keen, and resolute mendicant’s mind is freed, their defilements are ended, and they arrive at the supreme sanctuary from the yoke. | T: “This is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One who knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened, wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute, his unliberated mind comes to be liberated, his undestroyed taints come to be destroyed, and he attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not attained before. “Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, a bhikkhu enters and abides in the second jhāna…He considers this and understands it thus: ‘This second jhāna is conditioned and volitionally produced. But whatever is conditioned and volitionally produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.’ If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints. But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints…without ever returning from that world. “This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One … wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute…he attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not attained before. “Again, with the fading away as well of rapture, a bhikkhu…enters upon and abides in the third jhāna…He considers this and understands it thus: ‘This third jhāna is conditioned and volitionally produced. But whatever is conditioned and volitionally produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.’ If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints. But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints…without ever returning from that world. “This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One… wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute…he attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not attained before. “Again, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain…a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna…He considers this and understands it thus: ‘This fourth jhāna is conditioned and volitionally produced. But whatever is conditioned and volitionally produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.’ If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints. But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints…without ever returning from that world. “This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One… wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute…he attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not attained before.
mn52:5.1 | S: Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption … | T: (none)
mn52:6.1 | S: third absorption … | T: (none)
mn52:7.1 | S: fourth absorption … | T: (none)
mn52:8.1 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant meditates spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of love to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. | T: “Again, a bhikkhu abides pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, likewise the second, likewise the third, likewise the fourth; so above, below, around, and everywhere, and to all as to himself, he abides pervading the all-encompassing world with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility and without ill will. He considers this and understands it thus: ‘This deliverance of mind through loving-kindness is conditioned and volitionally produced. But whatever is conditioned and volitionally produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.’ If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints. But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints…without ever returning from that world. “This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One… wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute…he attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not attained before. “Again, a bhikkhu abides pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with compassion…without ill will. He considers this and understands it thus: ‘This deliverance of mind through compassion is conditioned and volitionally produced. But whatever is conditioned and volitionally produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.’ If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints. But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints…without ever returning from that world. “This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One… wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute…he attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not attained before. “Again, a bhikkhu abides pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with altruistic joy…without ill will.
mn52:8.2 | S: Then they reflect: | T: He considers this and understands it thus:
mn52:8.3 | S: ‘Even this heart’s release by love is produced by choices and intentions.’ | T: ‘This deliverance of mind through altruistic joy is conditioned and volitionally produced.
mn52:8.4 | S: They understand: ‘But whatever is produced by choices and intentions is impermanent and liable to cessation.’ … | T: But whatever is conditioned and volitionally produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.’ If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints. But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints…without ever returning from that world.
mn52:8.5 | P: So tattha ṭhito …pe… | T: “This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One… wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent,
mn52:8.6 | P: anuttaraṁ yogakkhemaṁ anupāpuṇāti. | T: and resolute…he attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not attained before.
mn52:9.1 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant meditates spreading a heart full of compassion … | T: “Again, a bhikkhu abides pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with equanimity…without ill will.
mn52:10.1 | S: rejoicing … | T: (none)
mn52:11.1 | S: equanimity … | T: (none)
mn52:11.2 | P: So iti paṭisañcikkhati: | T: He considers this and understands it thus:
mn52:11.3 | P: ‘ayampi kho upekkhācetovimutti abhisaṅkhatā abhisañcetayitā. | T: ‘This deliverance of mind through equanimity is conditioned and volitionally produced.
mn52:11.4 | P: Yaṁ kho pana kiñci abhisaṅkhataṁ abhisañcetayitaṁ tadaniccaṁ nirodhadhamman’ti pajānāti. | T: But whatever is conditioned and volitionally produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.’
mn52:11.5 | P: So tattha ṭhito …pe… | T: If he is steady in that,
mn52:11.6 | P: anuttaraṁ yogakkhemaṁ anupāpuṇāti. | T: he attains the destruction of the taints. But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints…without ever returning from that world. “This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One… wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute…he attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not attained before.
mn52:12.1 | S: Furthermore, householder, a mendicant, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite’, enters and remains in the dimension of infinite space. | T: “Again, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of sensory impact, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infinite space.
mn52:12.2 | S: Then they reflect: | T: He considers this and understands it thus:
mn52:12.3 | S: ‘Even this attainment of the dimension of infinite space is produced by choices and intentions.’ | T: ‘This attainment of the base of infinite space is conditioned and volitionally produced.
mn52:12.4 | S: They understand: ‘But whatever is produced by choices and intentions is impermanent and liable to cessation.’ … | T: But whatever is conditioned and volitionally produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.’
mn52:12.5 | P: So tattha ṭhito …pe… | T: If he is steady in that,
mn52:12.6 | P: anuttaraṁ yogakkhemaṁ anupāpuṇāti. | T: he attains the destruction of the taints. But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints…without ever returning from that world. “This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One … wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute…he attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not attained before.
mn52:13.1 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite’, enters and remains in the dimension of infinite consciousness. … | T: “Again, by completely surmounting the base of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infinite consciousness. He considers this and understands it thus: ‘This attainment of the base of infinite consciousness is conditioned and volitionally produced.
mn52:13.4 | P: Yaṁ kho pana kiñci abhisaṅkhataṁ abhisañcetayitaṁ tadaniccaṁ nirodhadhamman’ti pajānāti. | T: But whatever is conditioned and volitionally produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.’
mn52:13.5 | P: So tattha ṭhito …pe… | T: If he is steady in that,
mn52:13.6 | P: anuttaraṁ yogakkhemaṁ anupāpuṇāti. | T: he attains the destruction of the taints. But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints…without ever returning from that world.
mn52:14.1 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing at all’, enters and remains in the dimension of nothingness. | T: “This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One… wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute…he attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not attained before. “Again, by completely surmounting the base of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing,’ a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of nothingness.
mn52:14.2 | S: Then they reflect: | T: He considers this and understands it thus:
mn52:14.3 | S: ‘Even this attainment of the dimension of nothingness is produced by choices and intentions.’ | T: ‘This attainment of the base of nothingness is conditioned and volitionally produced.
mn52:14.4 | S: They understand: ‘But whatever is produced by choices and intentions is impermanent and liable to cessation.’ | T: But whatever is conditioned and volitionally produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.’
mn52:14.5 | S: Abiding in that they attain the ending of defilements. | T: If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints.
mn52:14.6 | S: If they don’t attain the ending of defilements, with the ending of the five lower fetters they’re reborn spontaneously because of their passion and love for that meditation. They are extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. | T: But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints because of that desire for the Dhamma, that delight in the Dhamma, then with the destruction of the five lower fetters he becomes one due to reappear spontaneously in the Pure Abodes and there attain final Nibbāna without ever returning from that world.
mn52:14.7 | S: This too is one thing that has been rightly explained by the Blessed One—who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha—practicing which a diligent, keen, and resolute mendicant’s mind is freed, their defilements are ended, and they arrive at the supreme sanctuary from the yoke.” | T: “This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One who knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened, wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute, his unliberated mind comes to be liberated, his undestroyed taints come to be destroyed, and he attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not attained before.”
mn52:15.1 | S: When he said this, the householder Dasama said to Venerable Ānanda, | T: When venerable Ānanda had spoken, the householder Dasama of Aṭṭhakanāgara said to him:
mn52:15.2 | S: “Honorable Ānanda, suppose a person was looking for the entrance to a treasure trove. And all at once they’d come across eleven entrances! | T: “Venerable Ānanda, just as if a man seeking one entrance to a hidden treasure came all at once upon eleven entrances to a hidden treasure,
mn52:15.3 | S: In the same way, I was searching for the door to freedom from death. And all at once I found eleven doors to freedom from death for cultivation. | T: so too, while I was seeking one door to the Deathless, I have come all at once to hear of eleven doors to the Deathless.
mn52:15.4 | S: Suppose a person had a house with eleven doors. If the house caught fire they’d be able to flee to safety through any one of those doors. | T: Just as if a man had a house with eleven doors and when that house caught on fire, he could flee to safety by any one of these eleven doors,
mn52:15.5 | S: In the same way, I’m able to flee to safety through any one of these eleven doors to freedom from death. | T: so I can flee to safety by any one of these eleven doors to the Deathless.
mn52:15.6 | S: Sir, those of other religions seek a fee for the tutor. Why shouldn’t I make an offering to Venerable Ānanda?” | T: Venerable sir, these sectarians will even seek a teacher’s fee for their teacher; why shouldn’t I make an offering to the venerable Ānanda?”
mn52:16.1 | S: Then the householder Dasama, having assembled the Saṅgha from Vesālī and Pāṭaliputta, served and satisfied them with his own hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods. | T: Then the householder Dasama of Aṭṭhakanāgara assembled the Sangha of bhikkhus from Pāṭaliputta and Vesālī, and with his own hands he served and satisfied them with various kinds of good food.
mn52:16.2 | S: He clothed each and every mendicant in a pair of garments, with a set of three robes for Ānanda. And he had a dwelling worth five hundred built for Ānanda. | T: He presented a pair of cloths to each bhikkhu, and he presented a triple robe to the venerable Ānanda, and he had a dwelling worth five hundred built for the venerable Ānanda.

