## sn12.3
sn12.3:1.1 | S: At Sāvatthī. | T: At Savatthī.
sn12.3:1.2 | S: “Mendicants, I will teach you the wrong practice and the right practice. | T: “Bhikkhus, I will teach you the wrong way and the right way.
sn12.3:1.3 | S: Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.” | T: Listen to that and attend closely, I will speak.”
sn12.3:1.4 | S: “Yes, sir,” they replied. | T: “Yes, venerable sir,” those bhikkhus replied.
sn12.3:1.5 | S: The Buddha said this: | T: The Blessed One said this:
sn12.3:2.1 | S: “And what’s the wrong practice? | T: “And what, bhikkhus, is the wrong way?
sn12.3:2.2 | S: Ignorance is a requirement for choices. | T: With ignorance as condition, volitional formations come to be;
sn12.3:2.3 | S: Choices are a requirement for consciousness. … | T: with volitional formations as condition, consciousness….
sn12.3:2.4 | S: That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. | T: Such is the origin of this whole mass of suffering.
sn12.3:2.5 | S: This is called the wrong practice. | T: This, bhikkhus, is called the wrong way.
sn12.3:3.1 | S: And what’s the right practice? | T: “And what, bhikkhus, is the right way?
sn12.3:3.2 | S: When ignorance fades away and ceases with no residue left behind, choices cease. | T: With the remainderless fading away and cessation of ignorance comes cessation of volitional formations; with the cessation of volitional formations,
sn12.3:3.3 | S: When choices cease, consciousness ceases. … | T: cessation of consciousness….
sn12.3:3.4 | S: That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases. | T: Such is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering.
sn12.3:3.5 | S: This is called the right practice.” | T: This, bhikkhus, is called the right way.”

## sn12.41
sn12.41:1.1 | S: At Sāvatthī. | T: At Savatthī.
sn12.41:1.2 | S: Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. Seated to one side, the Buddha said to the householder Anāthapiṇḍika: | T: Then the householder Anathapiṇḍika approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, and sat down to one side. The Blessed One then said to him:
sn12.41:2.1 | S: “Householder, when a noble disciple has quelled five fears and enmities, possesses the four factors of stream-entry, and has clearly seen and penetrated the noble system with wisdom, they may, if they wish, declare of themselves: | T: “Householder, when five fearful animosities have subsided in a noble disciple, and he possesses the four factors of stream-entry, and he has clearly seen and thoroughly penetrated with wisdom the noble method, if he wishes he could by himself declare of himself:
sn12.41:2.2 | S: ‘I’ve finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am assured, destined for awakening.’ | T: ‘I am one finished with hell, finished with the animal realm, finished with the domain of ghosts, finished with the plane of misery, the bad destinations, the nether world. I am a stream-enterer, no longer bound to the nether world, fixed in destiny, with enlightenment as my destination.’
sn12.41:3.1 | S: What are the five fears and enmities they have quelled? | T: “What are the five fearful animosities that have subsided?
sn12.41:3.2 | S: Anyone who kills living creatures brims with fear and enmity both in this life and in lives to come, and experiences mental pain and sadness. That fear and enmity is quelled for anyone who refrains from killing living creatures. | T: Householder, one who destroys life engenders, on account of such behaviour, fearful animosity pertaining to the present life and fearful animosity pertaining to the future life, and he experiences mental pain and displeasure. Thus for one who abstains from destroying life, this fearful animosity has subsided.
sn12.41:4.1 | S: Anyone who steals brims with fear and enmity both in this life and in lives to come, and experiences mental pain and sadness. That fear and enmity is quelled for anyone who refrains from stealing. | T: “One who takes what is not given … …
sn12.41:5.1 | S: Anyone who commits sexual misconduct brims with fear and enmity both in this life and in lives to come, and experiences mental pain and sadness. That fear and enmity is quelled for anyone who refrains from sexual misconduct. | T: who engages in sexual misconduct …
sn12.41:6.1 | S: Anyone who lies brims with fear and enmity both in this life and in lives to come, and experiences mental pain and sadness. That fear and enmity is quelled for anyone who refrains from lying. | T: who speaks falsely …
sn12.41:7.1 | S: Anyone who consumes beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants brims with fear and enmity both in this life and in lives to come, and experiences mental pain and sadness. That fear and enmity is quelled for anyone who refrains from beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. | T: who indulges in wine, liquor, and intoxicants that are a basis for negligence engenders, on account of such behaviour, fearful animosity pertaining to the present life and fearful animosity pertaining to the future life, and he experiences mental pain and displeasure. Thus for one who abstains from wine, liquor, and intoxicants that are a basis for negligence, this fearful animosity has subsided.
sn12.41:7.2 | S: These are the five fears and enmities they have quelled. | T: “These are the five fearful animosities that have subsided.
sn12.41:8.1 | S: What are the four factors of stream-entry that they possess? | T: “What are the four factors of stream-entry that he possesses?
sn12.41:8.2 | S: It’s when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha: | T: Here, householder, the noble disciple possesses confirmed confidence in the Buddha thus:
sn12.41:8.3 | S: ‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ | T: ‘The Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’
sn12.41:9.1 | S: They have experiential confidence in the teaching: | T: “He possesses confirmed confidence in the Dhamma thus:
sn12.41:9.2 | S: ‘The teaching is well explained by the Buddha—apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.’ | T: ‘The Dhamma is well expounded by the Blessed One, directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.’
sn12.41:10.1 | S: They have experiential confidence in the Saṅgha: | T: “He possesses confirmed confidence in the Saṅgha thus:
sn12.41:10.2 | S: ‘The Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples is practicing the way that’s good, direct, systematic, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight individual persons. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with cupped palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.’ | T: ‘The Saṅgha of the Blessed One’s disciples is practising the good way, practising the straight way, practising the true way, practising the proper way; that is, the four pairs of persons, the eight types of individuals—this Saṅgha of the Blessed One’s disciples is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, the unsurpassed field of merit for the world.’
sn12.41:11.1 | S: And a noble disciple’s ethical conduct is loved by the noble ones, unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. | T: “He possesses the virtues dear to the noble ones—unbroken, untorn, unblemished, unmottled, freeing, praised by the wise, ungrasped, leading to concentration.
sn12.41:11.2 | S: These are the four factors of stream-entry that they possess. | T: “These are the four factors of stream-entry that he possesses.
sn12.41:12.1 | S: And what is the noble system that they have clearly seen and penetrated with wisdom? | T: “And what is the noble method that he has clearly seen and thoroughly penetrated with wisdom?
sn12.41:12.2 | S: A noble disciple carefully and rationally applies the mind to dependent origination itself: | T: Here, householder, the noble disciple attends closely and carefully to dependent origination itself thus: ‘When this exists, that comes to be; with the arising of this, that arises.
sn12.41:12.3 | S: ‘So, when this exists, that comes to be; when this doesn’t exist, that is not. | T: When this does not exist, that does not come to be;
sn12.41:12.4 | S: Due to the arising of this, that arises; due to the cessation of this, that ceases. | T: with the cessation of this, that ceases.
sn12.41:12.5 | S: Ignorance is a requirement for choices. | T: That is, with ignorance as condition, volitional formations come to be;
sn12.41:12.6 | S: Choices are a requirement for consciousness. … | T: with volitional formations as condition, consciousness….
sn12.41:12.7 | S: That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. | T: Such is the origin of this whole mass of suffering.
sn12.41:12.8 | S: When ignorance fades away and ceases with no residue left behind, choices cease. | T: But with the remainderless fading away and cessation of ignorance comes cessation of volitional formations;
sn12.41:12.9 | S: When choices cease, consciousness ceases. … | T: with the cessation of volitional formations, cessation of consciousness….
sn12.41:12.10 | S: That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.’ | T: Such is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering.’
sn12.41:12.11 | S: This is the noble system that they have clearly seen and penetrated with wisdom. | T: “This is the noble method that he has clearly seen and thoroughly penetrated with wisdom.
sn12.41:13.1 | S: When a noble disciple has quelled five fears and enmities, possesses the four factors of stream-entry, and has clearly seen and penetrated the noble system with wisdom, they may, if they wish, declare of themselves: | T: “When, householder, these five fearful animosities have subsided in a noble disciple, and he possesses these four factors of stream-entry, and he has clearly seen and thoroughly penetrated with wisdom this noble method, if he wishes he could by himself declare of himself:
sn12.41:13.2 | S: ‘I’ve finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am assured, destined for awakening.’” | T: ‘I am one finished with hell, finished with the animal realm, finished with the domain of ghosts, finished with the plane of misery, the bad destinations, the nether world. I am a stream-enterer, no longer bound to the nether world, fixed in destiny, with enlightenment as my destination.’”

## sn12.46
sn12.46:1.1 | S: At Sāvatthī. | T: At Savatthī.
sn12.46:1.2 | S: Then a certain brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. | T: Then a certain brahmin approached the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him.
sn12.46:1.3 | S: When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha: | T: When they had concluded their greetings and cordial talk, he sat down to one side and said to him:
sn12.46:2.1 | S: “Worthy Gotama, are he who does the deed and he who experiences the result one and the same?” | T: “How is it, Master Gotama: is the one who acts the same as the one who experiences the result?”
sn12.46:2.2 | S: “‘He who does the deed and he who experiences the result are one and the same’: this is one extreme, brahmin.” | T: “‘The one who acts is the same as the one who experiences the result’: this, brahmin, is one extreme.”
sn12.46:3.1 | S: “Then is he who does the deed one and he who experiences the result another?” | T: “Then, Master Gotama, is the one who acts one, and the one who experiences the result another?”
sn12.46:3.2 | S: “‘He who does the deed is one and he who experiences the result is another’: this is the second extreme. | T: “‘The one who acts is one, and the one who experiences the result is another’: this, brahmin, is the second extreme.
sn12.46:3.3 | S: Avoiding these two extremes, the Realized One teaches by the middle way: | T: Without veering towards either of these extremes, the Tathagata teaches the Dhamma by the middle:
sn12.46:3.4 | S: ‘Ignorance is a requirement for choices. | T: ‘With ignorance as condition, volitional formations come to be;
sn12.46:3.5 | S: Choices are a requirement for consciousness. … | T: with volitional formations as condition, consciousness….
sn12.46:3.6 | S: That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. | T: Such is the origin of this whole mass of suffering.
sn12.46:3.7 | S: When ignorance fades away and ceases no residue left behind, choices cease. | T: But with the remainderless fading away and cessation of ignorance comes cessation of volitional formations; with the cessation of volitional formations,
sn12.46:3.8 | S: When choices cease … | T: cessation of consciousness….
sn12.46:3.9 | S: That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.’” | T: Such is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering.’”
sn12.46:4.1 | S: When he said this, the brahmin said to the Buddha, | T: When this was said, that brahmin said to the Blessed One:
sn12.46:4.2 | S: “Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! … | T: “Magnificent, Master Gotama!…
sn12.46:4.3 | S: From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” | T: I go for refuge to Master Gotama, and to the Dhamma, and to the Bhikkhu Saṅgha. From today let Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”

## sn12.61
sn12.61:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
sn12.61:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. … | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anathapiṇḍika’s Park….
sn12.61:1.3 | S: “Mendicants, an unlearned ordinary person might become disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed from this body made up of the four principal states. | T: “Bhikkhus, the uninstructed worldling might experience revulsion towards this body composed of the four great elements; he might become dispassionate towards it and be liberated from it.
sn12.61:1.4 | S: Why is that? | T: For what reason?
sn12.61:1.5 | S: This body made up of the four principal states is seen to accumulate and disperse, to be taken up and laid to rest. | T: Because growth and decline is seen in this body composed of the four great elements, it is seen being taken up and laid aside.
sn12.61:1.6 | S: That’s why an unlearned ordinary person might become disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed from it. | T: Therefore the uninstructed worldling might experience revulsion towards this body composed of the four great elements; he might become dispassionate towards it and be liberated from it.
sn12.61:2.1 | S: But an unlearned ordinary person is unable to become disillusioned, dispassionate, or freed from that which is called ‘mind’ and also ‘sentience’ and also ‘consciousness’. | T: “But, bhikkhus, as to that which is called ‘mind’ and ‘mentality’ and ‘consciousness’ —the uninstructed worldling is unable to experience revulsion towards it, unable to become dispassionate towards it and be liberated from it.
sn12.61:2.2 | S: Why is that? | T: For what reason?
sn12.61:2.3 | S: Because for a long time they’ve been attached to it, thought of it as their own, and mistaken it: | T: Because for a long time this has been held to by him, appropriated, and grasped thus:
sn12.61:2.4 | S: ‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self.’ | T: ‘This is mine, this I am, this is my self.’
sn12.61:2.5 | S: That’s why an unlearned ordinary person is unable to become disillusioned, dispassionate, or freed from it. | T: Therefore the uninstructed worldling is unable to experience revulsion towards it, unable to become dispassionate towards it and be liberated from it.
sn12.61:3.1 | S: But an unlearned ordinary person would be better off taking this body made up of the four principal states to be their self, rather than the mind. | T: “It would be better, bhikkhus, for the uninstructed worldling to take as self this body composed of the four great elements rather than the mind.
sn12.61:3.2 | S: Why is that? | T: For what reason?
sn12.61:3.3 | S: This body made up of the four principal states is seen to last for a year, or for two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, or a hundred years, or even longer. | T: Because this body composed of the four great elements is seen standing for one year, for two years, for three, four, five, or ten years, for twenty, thirty, forty, or fifty years, for a hundred years, or even longer.
sn12.61:4.1 | S: But that which is called ‘mind’ and also ‘sentience’ and also ‘consciousness’ arises as one thing and ceases as another all day and all night. | T: But that which is called ‘mind’ and ‘mentality’ and ‘consciousness’ arises as one thing and ceases as another by day and by night.
sn12.61:4.2 | S: It’s like a monkey moving through the forest. It grabs hold of one branch, lets it go, and grabs another; then it lets that go and grabs yet another. | T: Just as a monkey roaming through a forest grabs hold of one branch, lets that go and grabs another, then lets that go and grabs still another,
sn12.61:4.3 | S: In the same way, that which is called ‘mind’ and also ‘sentience’ and also ‘consciousness’ arises as one thing and ceases as another all day and all night. | T: so too that which is called ‘mind’ and ‘mentality’ and ‘consciousness’ arises as one thing and ceases as another by day and by night.
sn12.61:5.1 | S: In this case, a learned noble disciple carefully and rationally applies the mind to dependent origination itself: | T: “Therein, bhikkhus, the instructed noble disciple attends closely and carefully to dependent origination itself thus:
sn12.61:5.2 | S: ‘So, when this exists, this comes to be; due to the arising of this, this arises. | T: ‘When this exists, that comes to be; with the arising of this, that arises.
sn12.61:5.3 | S: When this doesn’t exist, this doesn’t come to be; due to the cessation of this, this ceases. That is: | T: When this does not exist, that does not come to be; with the cessation of this, that ceases. That is,
sn12.61:5.4 | S: Ignorance is a requirement for choices. | T: with ignorance as condition, volitional formations come to be;
sn12.61:5.5 | S: Choices are a requirement for consciousness. … | T: with volitional formations as condition, consciousness….
sn12.61:5.6 | S: That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. | T: Such is the origin of this whole mass of suffering.
sn12.61:5.7 | S: When ignorance fades away and ceases no residue left behind, choices cease. | T: But with the remainderless fading away and cessation of ignorance comes cessation of volitional formations; with the cessation of volitional formations,
sn12.61:5.8 | S: When choices cease, consciousness ceases. … | T: cessation of consciousness….
sn12.61:5.9 | S: That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.’ | T: Such is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering.
sn12.61:6.1 | S: Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. | T: “Seeing thus, bhikkhus, the instructed noble disciple experiences revulsion towards form, revulsion towards feeling, revulsion towards perception, revulsion towards volitional formations, revulsion towards consciousness.
sn12.61:6.2 | S: Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When they’re freed, they know they’re freed. | T: Experiencing revulsion, he becomes dispassionate. Through dispassion his mind is liberated. When it is liberated there comes the knowledge: ‘It’s liberated.’
sn12.61:6.3 | S: They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’” | T: He understands: ‘Destroyed is birth, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more for this state of being.’”

## sn12.69
sn12.69:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
sn12.69:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anathapiṇḍika’s Park. There the Blessed One said:
sn12.69:1.4 | S: “Mendicants, when the ocean surges it makes the rivers surge. When the rivers surge they make the streams surge. When the streams surge they make the lakes surge. When the lakes surge they make the ponds surge. | T: “Bhikkhus, the ocean surging causes the rivers to surge; the rivers surging cause the streams to surge; the streams surging cause the lakes to surge; the lakes surging cause the pools to surge.
sn12.69:1.5 | S: In the same way, when ignorance surges it makes choices surge. When choices surge they make consciousness surge. When consciousness surges it makes name and form surge. When name and form surge they make the six sense fields surge. When the six sense fields surge they make contact surge. When contact surges it makes feeling surge. When feeling surges it makes craving surge. When craving surges it makes grasping surge. When grasping surges it makes continued existence surge. When continued existence surges it makes rebirth surge. When rebirth surges it makes old age and death surge. | T: So too, ignorance surging causes volitional formations to surge; volitional formations surging cause consciousness to surge; consciousness surging causes name-and-form to surge; name-and-form surging causes the six sense bases to surge; the six sense bases surging cause contact to surge; contact surging causes feeling to surge; feeling surging causes craving to surge; craving surging causes clinging to surge; clinging surging causes existence to surge; existence surging causes birth to surge; birth surging causes aging-and-death to surge.
sn12.69:2.1 | S: When the ocean recedes it makes the rivers recede. When the rivers recede they make the streams recede. When the streams recede they make the lakes recede. When the lakes recede they make the ponds recede. | T: “Bhikkhus, the ocean receding causes the rivers to recede; the rivers receding cause the streams to recede; the streams receding cause the lakes to recede; the lakes receding cause the pools to recede.
sn12.69:2.2 | S: In the same way, when ignorance recedes it makes choices recede. When choices recede they make consciousness recede. When consciousness recedes it makes name and form recede. When name and form recede they make the six sense fields recede. When the six sense fields recede they make contact recede. When contact recedes it makes feeling recede. When feeling recedes it makes craving recede. When craving recedes it makes grasping recede. When grasping recedes it makes continued existence recede. When continued existence recedes it makes rebirth recede. When rebirth recedes it makes old age and death recede.” | T: So too, ignorance receding causes volitional formations to recede; volitional formations receding cause consciousness to recede … birth receding causes aging-and-death to recede.”

## sn12.71
sn12.71:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
sn12.71:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anathapiṇḍika’s Park. There the Blessed One said:
sn12.71:1.4 | S: “Mendicants, there are ascetics and brahmins who don’t understand old age and death, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation. | T: “Bhikkhus, those ascetics or brahmins who do not understand aging-and-death, its origin, its cessation, and the way leading to its cessation:
sn12.71:1.5 | S: I don’t deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables don’t realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and don’t live having realized it with their own insight in this very life. | T: these I do not consider to be ascetics among ascetics or brahmins among brahmins, and these venerable ones do not, by realizing it for themselves with direct knowledge, in this very life enter and dwell in the goal of asceticism or the goal of brahminhood.
sn12.71:2.1 | S: There are ascetics and brahmins who do understand old age and death, their origin, their cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation. | T: “But, bhikkhus, those ascetics and brahmins who understand aging-and-death, its origin, its cessation, and the way leading to its cessation:
sn12.71:2.2 | S: I deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and live having realized it with their own insight.” | T: these I consider to be ascetics among ascetics and brahmins among brahmins, and these venerable ones, by realizing it for themselves with direct knowledge, in this very life enter and dwell in the goal of asceticism and the goal of brahminhood.”

## sn12.83
sn12.83:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, one who does not truly know or see rebirth …” | T: “Bhikkhus, one who does not know and see as it really is aging-and-death … volitional formations, their origin, their cessation, and the way leading to their cessation, should practise the training in order to know this as it really is.”

## sn12.85
sn12.85:1.1 | S: “… grasping …” | T: “Bhikkhus,

## sn12.86
sn12.86:1.1 | S: “… craving …” | T: one who does not know and see as it really is aging-and-death …

## sn12.91
sn12.91:1.1 | S: “… consciousness …” | T: volitional formations,

## sn16.12
sn16.12:1.1 | S: At one time Venerable Mahākassapa and Venerable Sāriputta were staying near Varanasi in the deer park at Isipatana. | T: On one occasion the Venerable Mahakassapa and the Venerable Sāriputta were dwelling at Baraṇasī in the Deer Park at Isipatana.
sn16.12:1.2 | S: Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Sāriputta came out of retreat, went to Venerable Mahākassapa, and exchanged greetings with him. | T: Then, in the evening, the Venerable Sāriputta emerged from seclusion and approached the Venerable Mahakassapa. He exchanged greetings with the Venerable Mahakassapa and,
sn16.12:1.3 | S: When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to Mahākassapa: | T: when they had concluded their greetings and cordial talk, he sat down to one side and said to him:
sn16.12:1.4 | S: “Reverend Kassapa, does a realized one still exist after death?” | T: “How is it, friend Kassapa, does the Tathagata exist after death?”
sn16.12:1.5 | S: “Reverend, this has not been declared by the Buddha.” | T: “The Blessed One, friend, has not declared this:
sn16.12:1.7 | S: “Well then, does a realized one no longer exist after death?” | T: ‘The Tathagata exists after death.’” “Then, friend, does the Tathagata not exist after death?”
sn16.12:1.8 | S: “This too has not been declared by the Buddha.” | T: “The Blessed One, friend, has not declared this either:
sn16.12:1.10 | S: “Well then, does a realized one both still exist and no longer exist after death?” | T: ‘The Tathagata does not exist after death.’” “How is it then, friend, does the Tathagata both exist and not exist after death?”
sn16.12:1.11 | S: “This too has not been declared by the Buddha.” | T: “The Blessed One, friend, has not declared this:
sn16.12:1.13 | S: “Well then, does a realized one neither still exist nor no longer exist after death?” | T: ‘The Tathagata both exists and does not exist after death.’” “Then, friend, does the Tathagata neither exist nor not exist after death?”
sn16.12:1.14 | S: “This too has not been declared by the Buddha.” | T: “The Blessed One, friend, has not declared this either:
sn16.12:1.15 | P: ‘neva hoti na na hoti tathāgato paraṁ maraṇā’”ti. | T: ‘The Tathagata neither exists nor does not exist after death.’”
sn16.12:1.16 | S: “And why has this not been declared by the Buddha?” | T: “Why hasn’t the Blessed One declared this, friend?”
sn16.12:1.17 | S: “Because it’s not beneficial or relevant to the fundamentals of the spiritual life. It doesn’t lead to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. | T: “Because this is unbeneficial, irrelevant to the fundamentals of the holy life, and does not lead to revulsion, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbāna.
sn16.12:1.18 | S: That’s why it has not been declared by the Buddha.” | T: Therefore the Blessed One has not declared this.”
sn16.12:2.1 | S: “So what now has been declared by the Buddha?” | T: “And what, friend, has the Blessed One declared?”
sn16.12:2.2 | S: “‘This is suffering’ has been declared by the Buddha. | T: “The Blessed One, friend, has declared: ‘This is suffering,’ and
sn16.12:2.3 | S: ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … | T: ‘This is the origin of suffering,’ and
sn16.12:2.4 | S: ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … | T: ‘This is the cessation of suffering, ’ and
sn16.12:2.5 | S: ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’ has been declared by the Buddha.” | T: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’”
sn16.12:2.6 | S: “And why has this been declared by the Buddha?” | T: “And why, friend, has the Blessed One declared this?”
sn16.12:2.7 | S: “Because it’s beneficial and relevant to the fundamentals of the spiritual life. It leads to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. | T: “Because, friend, this is beneficial, relevant to the fundamentals of the holy life, and leads to revulsion, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbāna.
sn16.12:2.8 | S: That’s why it has been declared by the Buddha.” | T: Therefore the Blessed One has declared this.”

## sn16.13
sn16.13:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
sn16.13:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anathapiṇḍika’s Park.
sn16.13:1.3 | S: Then Venerable Mahākassapa went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: | T: Then the Venerable Mahakassapa approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and said to him:
sn16.13:1.4 | S: “What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why there used to be fewer training rules but more enlightened mendicants? | T: “Venerable sir, what is the reason, what is the cause, why formerly there were fewer training rules but more bhikkhus were established in final knowledge,
sn16.13:1.5 | S: And what is the cause, what is the reason why these days there are more training rules and fewer enlightened mendicants?” | T: while now there are more training rules but fewer bhikkhus are established in final knowledge?”
sn16.13:1.6 | S: “That’s how it is, Kassapa. When sentient beings are in decline and the true teaching is disappearing there are more training rules and fewer enlightened mendicants. | T: “That’s the way it is, Kassapa. When beings are deteriorating and the true Dhamma is disappearing there are more training rules but fewer bhikkhus are established in final knowledge.
sn16.13:1.7 | S: The true teaching doesn’t disappear as long as the counterfeit of the true teaching hasn’t appeared in the world. | T: Kassapa, the true Dhamma does not disappear so long as a counterfeit of the true Dhamma has not arisen in the world.
sn16.13:1.8 | S: But when the counterfeit of the true teaching appears in the world then the true teaching disappears. | T: But when a counterfeit of the true Dhamma arises in the world, then the true Dhamma disappears.
sn16.13:2.1 | S: It’s like native gold, which doesn’t disappear as long as counterfeit gold hasn’t appeared in the world. | T: “Just as, Kassapa, gold does not disappear so long as counterfeit gold has not arisen in the world,
sn16.13:2.2 | S: But when counterfeit gold appears in the world then native gold disappears. | T: but when counterfeit gold arises then true gold disappears,
sn16.13:2.3 | S: In the same way, the true teaching doesn’t disappear as long as the counterfeit of the true teaching hasn’t appeared in the world. | T: so the true Dhamma does not disappear so long as a counterfeit of the true Dhamma has not arisen in the world,
sn16.13:2.4 | S: But when the counterfeit of the true teaching appears in the world then the true teaching disappears. | T: but when a counterfeit of the true Dhamma arises in the world, then the true Dhamma disappears.
sn16.13:3.1 | S: It’s not the elements of earth, water, fire, or air that make the true teaching disappear. | T: “It is not the earth element, Kassapa, that causes the true Dhamma to disappear, nor the water element, nor the heat element, nor the air element.
sn16.13:3.2 | S: Rather, it’s the futile people who appear right here that make the true teaching disappear. | T: It is the senseless people who arise right here who cause the true Dhamma to disappear.
sn16.13:3.3 | S: The true teaching doesn’t disappear like a ship that sinks all at once. | T: “The true Dhamma does not disappear all at once in the way a ship sinks.
sn16.13:4.1 | S: There are five detrimental things that lead to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching. | T: There are, Kassapa, five detrimental things that lead to the decay and disappearance of the true Dhamma.
sn16.13:4.2 | S: What five? | T: What are the five?
sn16.13:4.3 | S: It’s when the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen lack respect and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the training, and immersion. | T: Here the bhikkhus, the bhikkhunīs, the male lay followers, and the female lay followers dwell without reverence and deference towards the Teacher; they dwell without reverence and deference towards the Dhamma; they dwell without reverence and deference towards the Saṅgha; they dwell without reverence and deference towards the training; they dwell without reverence and deference towards concentration.
sn16.13:4.4 | S: These five detrimental things lead to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching. | T: These, Kassapa, are the five detrimental things that lead to the decay and disappearance of the true Dhamma.
sn16.13:5.1 | S: There are five things that lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching. | T: “There are five things, Kassapa, that lead to the longevity of the true Dhamma, to its nondecay and nondisappearance.
sn16.13:5.2 | S: What five? | T: What are the five?
sn16.13:5.3 | S: It’s when the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen maintain respect and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the training, and immersion. | T: Here the bhikkhus, the bhikkhunīs, the male lay followers, and the female lay followers dwell with reverence and deference towards the Teacher; they dwell with reverence and deference towards the Dhamma; they dwell with reverence and deference towards the Saṅgha; they dwell with reverence and deference towards the training; they dwell with reverence and deference towards concentration.
sn16.13:5.4 | S: These five things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching.” | T: These, Kassapa, are the five things that lead to the longevity of the true Dhamma,
sn16.13:6.7 | S: The Linked Discourses with Kassapa are complete. | T: to its nondecay and nondisappearance.”

## sn16.5
sn16.5:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
sn16.5:1.2 | S: Near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Rajagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrel Sanctuary.
sn16.5:1.3 | S: Then Venerable Mahākassapa went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: | T: Then the Venerable Mahakassapa approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, and sat down to one side. The Blessed One then said to him:
sn16.5:1.4 | S: “You’re old now, Kassapa. Those worn-out hempen rag robes must be a burden for you. | T: “You are old now, Kassapa, and those worn-out hempen rag-robes must be burdensome for you.
sn16.5:1.5 | S: So Kassapa, you should wear clothes given by householders, accept invitations for the meal, and stay in my presence.” | T: Therefore you should wear robes offered by householders, Kassapa, accept meals given on invitation, and dwell close to me.”
sn16.5:2.1 | S: “For a long time, sir, I’ve lived in the wilderness, eaten only almsfood, worn rag robes, and owned just three robes; and I’ve praised these things. I’ve been one of few wishes, content, secluded, aloof, and energetic; and I’ve praised these things.” | T: “For a long time, venerable sir, I have been a forest dweller and have spoken in praise of forest dwelling; I have been an almsfood eater and have spoken in praise of eating almsfood; I have been a rag-robe wearer and have spoken in praise of wearing rag-robes; I have been a triple-robe user and have spoken in praise of using the triple robe; I have been of few wishes and have spoken in praise of fewness of wishes; I have been content and have spoken in praise of contentment; I have been secluded and have spoken in praise of solitude; I have been aloof from society and have spoken in praise of aloofness from society; I have been energetic and have spoken in praise of arousing energy.”
sn16.5:3.1 | S: “But seeing what benefit, Kassapa, have you long practiced these things?” | T: “Considering what benefit, Kassapa, have you long been a forest dweller …
sn16.5:3.8 | P: āraddhavīriyo ceva vīriyārambhassa ca vaṇṇavādī”ti? | T: and spoken in praise of arousing energy?”
sn16.5:4.1 | S: “Sir, seeing two benefits I have long practiced these things. | T: “Considering two benefits, venerable sir.
sn16.5:5.1 | S: I see happiness for myself in this life. And I have sympathy for future generations, thinking: | T: For myself I see a pleasant dwelling in this very life, and I have compassion for later generations, thinking,
sn16.5:5.2 | S: ‘Hopefully those who come after might follow my example.’ | T: ‘May those of later generations follow my example!’
sn16.5:5.3 | S: For they may think: ‘It seems that the disciples awakened after the Buddha for a long time lived in the wilderness, ate only almsfood, wore rag robes, and owned just three robes; and they praised these things. They were of few wishes, content, secluded, aloof, and energetic; and they praised these things.’ | T: For when they hear, ‘The enlightened disciples of the Buddha were for a long time forest dwellers and spoke in praise of forest dwelling … were energetic and spoke in praise of arousing energy,’
sn16.5:5.12 | S: They’ll practice accordingly, which will be for their lasting welfare and happiness. | T: then they will practise accordingly, and that will lead to their welfare and happiness for a long time.
sn16.5:6.1 | S: Seeing these two benefits I have long practiced these things.” | T: Considering these two benefits, venerable sir, I have long been a forest dweller …
sn16.5:6.8 | P: āraddhavīriyo ceva vīriyārambhassa ca vaṇṇavādī”ti. | T: and have spoken in praise of arousing energy.”
sn16.5:7.1 | S: “Good, good, Kassapa! | T: “Good, good, Kassapa!
sn16.5:7.2 | S: You’re acting for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. | T: You are practising for the welfare and happiness of the multitude, out of compassion for the world, for the good, welfare, and happiness of devas and humans.
sn16.5:7.3 | S: So Kassapa, wear worn-out hempen rag robes, walk for alms, and stay in the wilderness.” | T: Therefore, Kassapa, wear worn-out hempen rag-robes, walk for alms, and dwell in the forest.”

## sn16.8
sn16.8:1.1 | S: Near Rājagaha, in the squirrels’ feeding ground. | T: At Rajagaha in the Bamboo Grove.
sn16.8:1.2 | S: Then Venerable Mahākassapa went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: | T: Then the Venerable Mahakassapa approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, and sat down to one side. The Blessed One then said to him:
sn16.8:1.3 | S: “Kassapa, advise the mendicants! | T: “Exhort the bhikkhus, Kassapa,
sn16.8:1.4 | S: Give them a Dhamma talk! | T: give them a Dhamma talk.
sn16.8:1.5 | S: Either you or I should advise the mendicants | T: Either I should exhort the bhikkhus, Kassapa, or you should.
sn16.8:1.6 | S: and give them a Dhamma talk.” | T: Either I should give them a Dhamma talk or you should.”
sn16.8:2.1 | S: “Sir, the mendicants these days are hard to admonish, having qualities that make them hard to admonish. They’re impatient, and don’t take instruction respectfully.” | T: “Venerable sir, the bhikkhus are difficult to admonish now, and they have qualities which make them difficult to admonish. They are impatient and do not accept instruction respectfully.”
sn16.8:2.2 | S: “Kassapa, that’s because formerly the senior mendicants lived in the wilderness, ate only almsfood, wore rag robes, and owned just three robes; and they praised these things. They were of few wishes, content, secluded, aloof, and energetic; and they praised these things. | T: “Just so, Kassapa, in the past the elder bhikkhus were forest dwellers and spoke in praise of forest dwelling; they were almsfood eaters and spoke in praise of eating almsfood; they were rag-robe wearers and spoke in praise of wearing rag-robes; they were triple-robe users and spoke in praise of using the triple robe; they were of few wishes and spoke in praise of fewness of wishes; they were content and spoke in praise of contentment; they were secluded and spoke in praise of solitude; they were aloof from society and spoke in praise of aloofness from society; they were energetic and spoke in praise of arousing energy. “Then, when a bhikkhu was a forest dweller and spoke in praise of forest dwelling … … when he was energetic and spoke in praise of arousing energy,
sn16.8:3.1 | S: The senior mendicants invite such a mendicant to a seat, saying: | T: the elder bhikkhus would invite him to a seat, saying:
sn16.8:3.2 | S: ‘Welcome, mendicant! What is this mendicant’s name? This mendicant is good-natured; he’s really eager to train. Please, mendicant, here, take a seat.’ | T: ‘Come, bhikkhu. What is this bhikkhu’s name? This is an excellent bhikkhu. This bhikkhu is keen on training. Come, bhikkhu, here’s a seat, sit down.’
sn16.8:4.1 | S: Then the junior mendicants think: | T: Then it would occur to the newly ordained bhikkhus:
sn16.8:4.2 | S: ‘It seems that when a mendicant lives in the wilderness … and is energetic, and praises these things, senior mendicants invite them to a seat …’ | T: ‘It seems that when a bhikkhu is a forest dweller and speaks in praise of forest dwelling … when he is energetic and speaks in praise of arousing energy, the elder bhikkhus invite him to a seat….’
sn16.8:4.4 | S: They practice accordingly. | T: They would practise accordingly,
sn16.8:4.5 | S: That is for their lasting welfare and happiness. | T: and that would lead to their welfare and happiness for a long time.
sn16.8:5.1 | S: But these days, Kassapa, the senior mendicants don’t live in the wilderness … and aren’t energetic; and they don’t praise these things. | T: “But now, Kassapa, the elder bhikkhus are no longer forest dwellers and do not speak in praise of forest dwelling … … they are no longer energetic and do not speak in praise of arousing energy.
sn16.8:6.1 | S: When a mendicant is well-known and famous, a recipient of robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick, senior mendicants invite them to a seat: | T: Now it is the bhikkhu who is well known and famous, one who gains robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicinal requisites, that the elder bhikkhus invite to a seat, saying:
sn16.8:6.2 | S: ‘Welcome, mendicant! What is this mendicant’s name? This mendicant is good-natured; he’s fond of his fellow monks. Please, mendicant, here, take a seat.’ | T: ‘Come, bhikkhu. What is this bhikkhu’s name? This is an excellent bhikkhu. This bhikkhu is keen on the company of his brothers in the holy life. Come, bhikkhu, here’s a seat, sit down.’
sn16.8:7.1 | S: Then the junior mendicants think: | T: Then it occurs to the newly ordained bhikkhus:
sn16.8:7.2 | S: ‘It seems that when a mendicant is well-known and famous, a recipient of robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick, senior mendicants invite them to a seat …’ | T: ‘It seems that when a bhikkhu is well known and famous, one who gains robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicinal requisites, the elder bhikkhus invite him to a seat….’
sn16.8:7.4 | S: They practice accordingly. | T: They practise accordingly,
sn16.8:7.5 | S: That is for their lasting harm and suffering. | T: and that leads to their harm and suffering for a long time.
sn16.8:7.6 | S: And if it could ever be rightly said that | T: “If, Kassapa, one speaking rightly could say:
sn16.8:7.7 | S: spiritual practitioners have been imperiled by the peril of a spiritual practitioner, and vanquished by the vanquishing of a spiritual practitioner, it is these days that this could be rightly said.” | T: ‘Those leading the holy life have been ruined by the ruination of those who lead the holy life; those leading the holy life have been vanquished by the vanquishing of those who lead the holy life,’ it is just thus that one could rightly say this.”

## sn21.1
sn21.1:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
sn21.1:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi in Jeta’s Grove, Anathapiṇḍika’s Park.
sn21.1:1.3 | S: There Venerable Mahāmoggallāna addressed the mendicants: | T: There the Venerable Mahamoggallana addressed the bhikkhus thus:
sn21.1:1.4 | S: “Reverends, mendicants!” | T: “Friends, bhikkhus!”
sn21.1:1.5 | S: “Reverend,” they replied. | T: “Friend!” those bhikkhus replied.
sn21.1:2.1 | S: Venerable Mahāmoggallāna said this: | T: The Venerable Mahamoggallana said this:
sn21.1:2.2 | S: “Just now, reverends, as I was in private retreat this thought came to mind: | T: “Here, friends, while I was alone in seclusion, a reflection arose in my mind thus:
sn21.1:2.3 | S: ‘They speak of this thing called “noble silence”. | T: ‘It is said, “noble silence, noble silence.”
sn21.1:2.4 | S: What then is this noble silence?’ | T: What now is noble silence?’
sn21.1:2.5 | S: It occurred to me: | T: “Then, friends, it occurred to me:
sn21.1:2.6 | S: ‘As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: ‘Here, with the subsiding of thought and examination, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the second jhana, which has internal confidence and unification of mind, is without thought and examination, and has rapture and happiness born of concentration.
sn21.1:2.7 | S: This is called noble silence.’ | T: This is called noble silence.’
sn21.1:2.8 | S: And so, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected were stilled, I was entering and remaining in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: “Then, friends, with the subsiding of thought and examination, I entered and dwelt in the second jhana, which … has rapture and happiness born of concentration.
sn21.1:2.9 | S: While I was in that meditation, perception and focus accompanied by placing the mind beset me. | T: While I dwelt therein, perception and attention accompanied by thought assailed me.
sn21.1:3.1 | S: Then the Buddha came up to me with his psychic power and said, | T: “Then, friends, the Blessed One came to me by means of spiritual power and said this:
sn21.1:3.2 | S: ‘Moggallāna, Moggallāna! Don’t neglect noble silence, brahmin! Settle your mind in noble silence; unify your mind and bring it to immersion in noble silence.’ | T: ‘Moggallana, Moggallana, do not be negligent regarding noble silence, brahmin. Steady your mind in noble silence, unify your mind in noble silence, concentrate your mind on noble silence.’
sn21.1:3.3 | S: And so, after some time, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected were stilled, I entered and remained in the second absorption … | T: Then, friends, on a later occasion, with the subsiding of thought and examination, I entered and dwelt in the second jhana, which has internal confidence and unification of mind, is without thought and examination, and has rapture and happiness born of concentration.
sn21.1:3.4 | S: So if anyone should be rightly called | T: “If, friends, one speaking rightly could say of anyone:
sn21.1:3.5 | S: a disciple who attained to great direct knowledge with help from the Teacher, it’s me.” | T: ‘He is a disciple who attained to greatness of direct knowledge with the assistance of the Teacher,’ it is of me that one could rightly say this.”

## sn21.2
sn21.2:1.1 | S: At Sāvatthī. | T: At Savatthi.
sn21.2:1.2 | S: There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: | T: There the Venerable Sāriputta addressed the bhikkhus thus:
sn21.2:1.3 | S: “Reverends, mendicants!” | T: “Friends, bhikkhus!”
sn21.2:1.4 | S: “Reverend,” they replied. | T: “Friend!” those bhikkhus replied.
sn21.2:1.5 | S: Sāriputta said this: | T: The Venerable Sāriputta said this:
sn21.2:2.1 | S: “Just now, reverends, as I was in private retreat this thought came to mind: | T: “Here, friends, when I was alone in seclusion, a reflection arose in my mind thus:
sn21.2:2.2 | S: ‘Is there anything in the world whose decay and perishing would give rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress in me?’ | T: ‘Is there anything in the world through the change and alteration of which sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair might arise in me?’
sn21.2:2.3 | S: It occurred to me: | T: Then it occurred to me:
sn21.2:2.4 | S: ‘There is nothing in the world whose decay and perishing would give rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress in me.’” | T: ‘There is nothing in the world through the change and alteration of which sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair might arise in me.’”
sn21.2:3.1 | S: When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to him, | T: When this was said, the Venerable Ānanda said to the Venerable Sāriputta:
sn21.2:3.2 | S: “Even if the Teacher were to decay and perish? Wouldn’t that give rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress in you?” | T: “Friend Sāriputta, even if the Teacher himself were to undergo change and alteration, wouldn’t sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair arise in you?”
sn21.2:3.3 | S: “Even if the Teacher were to decay and perish, that wouldn’t give rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress in me. Still, I would think: | T: “Friend, even if the Teacher himself were to undergo change and alteration, still sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair would not arise in me. However, it would occur to me:
sn21.2:3.4 | S: ‘Oh lord, the illustrious Teacher, so mighty and powerful, has vanished! | T: ‘The Teacher, so influential, so powerful and mighty, has passed away.
sn21.2:3.5 | S: If the Buddha was to remain for a long time, that would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans.’” | T: If the Blessed One had lived for a long time, that would have been for the welfare and happiness of the multitude, out of compassion for the world, for the good, welfare, and happiness of devas and humans.’”
sn21.2:3.6 | S: “That must be because Venerable Sāriputta has long ago totally eradicated I-making, mine-making, and the underlying tendency to conceit. | T: “It must be because I-making, mine-making, and the underlying tendency to conceit have been thoroughly uprooted in the Venerable Sāriputta for a long time that even if the Teacher himself were to undergo change and alteration,
sn21.2:3.7 | S: So even if the Teacher were to decay and perish, it wouldn’t give rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress in him.” | T: still sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair would not arise in him.”

