## sn16.11
sn16.11:1.1 | S: At one time Venerable Mahākassapa was staying near Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground. | T: On one occasion the Venerable Mahakassapa was dwelling in Rajagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrel Sanctuary.
sn16.11:1.2 | S: Now at that time Venerable Ānanda was wandering in the Southern Hills together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants. | T: Now on that occasion the Venerable Ānanda was wandering on tour in Dakkhiṇagiri together with a large Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
sn16.11:2.1 | S: And at that time thirty of Ānanda’s mendicant protégés resigned the training and returned to a lesser life. Most of them were youths. | T: Now on that occasion thirty bhikkhus—pupils of the Venerable Ānanda—most of them youngsters, had given up the training and had returned to the lower life.
sn16.11:2.2 | S: When Venerable Ānanda had wandered in the Southern Hills as long as he pleased, he set out for Rājagaha, to the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground. He went up to Venerable Mahākassapa, bowed, and sat down to one side. Mahākassapa said to him: | T: When the Venerable Ānanda had wandered on tour in Dakkhiṇagiri as long as he wanted, he came back to Rajagaha, to the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrel Sanctuary. He approached the Venerable Mahakassapa, paid homage to him, and sat down to one side, and the Venerable Mahakassapa said to him:
sn16.11:2.3 | S: “Reverend Ānanda, for how many reasons did the Buddha lay down a rule against eating in groups of more than three among families?” | T: “Friend Ānanda, for how many reasons did the Blessed One lay down the rule that bhikkhus should not take meals among families in groups of more than three?”
sn16.11:3.1 | S: “Sir, the Buddha laid down that rule for three reasons. | T: “The Blessed One laid down this rule for three reasons, Venerable Kassapa:
sn16.11:3.2 | S: For keeping difficult individuals in check and for the comfort of good-hearted mendicants. To prevent those of corrupt wishes from taking sides and dividing the Saṅgha. And out of consideration for families. | T: for restraining ill-behaved persons and for the comfort of well-behaved bhikkhus, with the intention, ‘May those of evil wishes, by forming a faction, not create a schism in the Saṅgha!’; and out of sympathy towards families.
sn16.11:3.3 | S: These are the three reasons why the Buddha laid down that rule.” | T: It is for these three reasons, Venerable Kassapa, that the Blessed One laid down this rule.”
sn16.11:4.1 | S: “So what then are you doing, wandering together with these junior mendicants? They don’t guard their sense doors, they eat too much, and they’re not committed to wakefulness. | T: “Then why, friend Ānanda, are you wandering about with these young bhikkhus who are unguarded in their sense faculties, immoderate in eating, and not devoted to wakefulness?
sn16.11:4.2 | S: It’s like you’re wandering about wrecking crops and ruining families! | T: One would think you were wandering about trampling on crops; one would think you were wandering about destroying families.
sn16.11:4.3 | S: Your following is falling away, Reverend Ānanda, | T: Your retinue is breaking apart, friend Ānanda, your young followers are slipping away.
sn16.11:4.4 | S: and those just getting started are falling apart. | T: (none)
sn16.11:4.5 | S: Yet this boy knows no limit!” | T: But still this youngster does not know his measure!”
sn16.11:5.1 | S: “Though there are grey hairs on my head, | T: “Grey hairs are growing on my head, Venerable Kassapa.
sn16.11:5.2 | S: I still can’t escape being called a boy by Venerable Mahākassapa.” | T: Can’t we escape being called a youngster by the Venerable Mahakassapa?”
sn16.11:5.3 | S: “It’s because you wander with these junior mendicants. … | T: “Friend Ānanda, it is just because you wander around with these young bhikkhus who are unguarded in their sense faculties….
sn16.11:5.4 | S: Your following is falling away, Reverend Ānanda, | T: (none)
sn16.11:5.5 | S: and those just getting started are falling apart. | T: (none)
sn16.11:5.6 | S: Yet this boy knows no limit!” | T: But still this youngster does not know his measure!”
sn16.11:6.1 | S: The nun Thullanandā heard a rumor that | T: The bhikkhunī Thullananda heard :
sn16.11:6.2 | S: the venerable Mahākassapa had rebuked the venerable Ānanda the Videhan sage by calling him a boy. | T: “Master Mahakassapa has disparaged Master Ānanda, the Videhan sage, by calling him a youngster.”
sn16.11:7.1 | S: She was upset and blurted out, | T: Then, being displeased at this, she expressed her displeasure thus:
sn16.11:7.2 | S: “How can the venerable Mahākassapa, who formerly followed another religion, presume to rebuke the venerable Ānanda the Videhan sage by calling him a boy?” | T: “How can Master Mahakassapa, who was formerly a member of another sect, think to disparage Master Ānanda, the Videhan sage, by calling him a youngster?”
sn16.11:7.3 | S: Mahākassapa heard Thullanandā say these words, | T: The Venerable Mahakassapa overheard the bhikkhunī Thullananda making this statement and said to the Venerable Ānanda:
sn16.11:8.1 | S: and he said to Ānanda, | T: (none)
sn16.11:8.2 | S: “Indeed, Reverend Ānanda, the nun Thullanandā spoke rashly and without reflection. | T: “Surely, friend Ānanda, the bhikkhunī Thullananda made that statement rashly, without consideration.
sn16.11:8.3 | S: Since I shaved off my hair and beard, dressed in ocher robes, and went forth from the lay life to homelessness, I don’t recall dedicating myself to any other teacher apart from the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. | T: For since I shaved off my hair and beard, put on saffron robes, and went forth from the home life into homelessness, I do not recall ever having acknowledged any other teacher except the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
sn16.11:8.4 | S: Formerly when I was still a layman, I thought: | T: “In the past, friend, when I was still a householder, it occurred to me:
sn16.11:8.5 | S: ‘Life at home is cramped and dirty, life gone forth is wide open. | T: ‘Household life is confinement, a path of dust, going forth is like the open air.
sn16.11:8.6 | S: It’s not easy for someone living at home to lead the spiritual life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell. | T: It is not easy for one living at home to lead the perfectly complete, perfectly purified holy life, which is like polished conch.
sn16.11:8.7 | S: Why don’t I shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness?’ | T: Let me then shave off my hair and beard, put on saffron robes, and go forth from the household life into homelessness.
sn16.11:8.8 | S: After some time I made an outer robe of patches and, in the name of the perfected ones in the world, I shaved off my hair and beard, dressed in ocher robes, and went forth from the lay life to homelessness. | T: ’ Some time later I had an outer robe made from patches of cloth; then, acknowledging those who were arahants in the world as models, I shaved off my hair and beard, put on saffron robes, and went forth from the household life into homelessness.
sn16.11:9.1 | S: When I had gone forth, I traveled along the road between Rājagaha and Nāḷandā, where I saw the Buddha sitting at the Many Sons Shrine. | T: “When I had thus gone forth, I was travelling along a road when I saw the Blessed One sitting by the Bahuputta Shrine between Rajagaha and Nalanda.
sn16.11:9.2 | S: Seeing him, I thought: | T: Having seen him, I thought:
sn16.11:9.3 | S: ‘Were I ever to see a Teacher, it would be this Blessed One! | T: ‘If I should ever see the Teacher, it is the Blessed One himself that I would see.
sn16.11:9.4 | S: Were I ever to see a Holy One, it would be this Blessed One! | T: If I should ever see the Fortunate One, it is the Blessed One himself that I would see.
sn16.11:9.5 | S: Were I ever to see a fully awakened Buddha, it would be this Blessed One!’ | T: If I should ever see the Perfectly Enlightened One, it is the Blessed One himself that I would see.’
sn16.11:9.7 | S: Then I bowed with my head to the Buddha’s feet and said: | T: Then I prostrated myself right there at the Blessed One’s feet and said to him:
sn16.11:9.8 | S: ‘Sir, the Buddha is my Teacher, I am his disciple! | T: ‘Venerable sir, the Blessed One is my teacher, I am his disciple.
sn16.11:9.9 | S: The Buddha is my Teacher, I am his disciple!’ | T: Venerable sir, the Blessed One is my teacher, I am his disciple.’
sn16.11:9.10 | S: The Buddha said to me, | T: “When I had said this, the Blessed One said to me:
sn16.11:9.11 | S: ‘Kassapa, if anyone was to say to such a wholehearted disciple that they know when they don’t know, or that they see when they don’t see, their head would explode. | T: ‘Kassapa, if one who does not know and see should say to a disciple so single-minded as yourself: “I know, I see,” his head would split.
sn16.11:9.12 | S: But Kassapa, when I say that I know I really do know; and when I say that I see I really do see. | T: But knowing, Kassapa, I say, “I know”; seeing, I say, “I see.”
sn16.11:10.1 | S: So you should train like this: | T: “‘Therefore, Kassapa, you should train yourself thus:
sn16.11:10.2 | S: “I will set up a keen sense of conscience and prudence for seniors, juniors, and those in the middle.” | T: “I will arouse a keen sense of shame and fear of wrongdoing towards elders, the newly ordained, and those of middle status.”
sn16.11:10.3 | S: That’s how you should train. | T: Thus should you train yourself.
sn16.11:11.1 | S: And you should train like this: | T: “‘Therefore, Kassapa, you should train yourself thus:
sn16.11:11.2 | S: “Whenever I hear a teaching connected with what’s skillful, I will pay attention, apply the mind, concentrate wholeheartedly, and actively listen to that teaching.” | T: “Whenever I listen to any Dhamma connected with the wholesome, I will listen to it with eager ears, attending to it as a matter of vital concern, applying my whole mind to it.”
sn16.11:11.3 | S: That’s how you should train. | T: Thus should you train yourself.
sn16.11:12.1 | S: And you should train like this: | T: “‘Therefore, Kassapa, you should train yourself thus:
sn16.11:12.2 | S: “I will never neglect mindfulness of the body that is full of pleasure.” | T: “I will never relinquish mindfulness directed to the body associated with joy.”
sn16.11:12.3 | S: That’s how you should train.’ | T: Thus should you train yourself.’
sn16.11:13.1 | S: And when the Buddha had given me this advice he rose from his seat and left. | T: “Then, having given me this exhortation, the Blessed One rose from his seat and departed.
sn16.11:13.2 | S: For seven days I ate the nation’s almsfood as a debtor. On the eighth day I became enlightened. | T: For seven days, friend, I ate the country’s almsfood as a debtor, but on the eighth day final knowledge arose.
sn16.11:14.1 | S: And then the Buddha left the road and went to the root of a certain tree. | T: “Then, friend, the Blessed One descended from the road and went to the foot of a tree.
sn16.11:14.2 | S: So I spread out my outer robe of patches folded in four and said to him, | T: I folded in four my outer robe of patches and said to him:
sn16.11:14.3 | S: ‘Sir, sit here. That would be for my lasting welfare and happiness.’ | T: ‘Venerable sir, let the Blessed One sit down here. This will lead to my welfare and happiness for a long time.’
sn16.11:14.4 | S: The Buddha sat down on the seat spread out | T: The Blessed One sat down on the appointed seat and said to me:
sn16.11:14.5 | S: and said to me, | T: (none)
sn16.11:14.6 | S: ‘Kassapa, this outer robe of patches is soft.’ | T: ‘Your outer robe of patches is soft, Kassapa.’–
sn16.11:14.7 | S: ‘Sir, please accept my outer robe of patches out of sympathy.’ | T: ‘Venerable sir, let the Blessed One accept my outer robe of patches, out of compassion.’–
sn16.11:14.8 | S: ‘In that case, Kassapa, will you wear my worn-out hempen rag robe?’ | T: ‘Then will you wear my worn-out hempen rag-robes? ’–
sn16.11:14.9 | S: ‘I will wear it, sir.’ | T: ‘I will, venerable sir.’
sn16.11:14.10 | S: And so I presented my outer robe of patches to the Buddha, | T: Thus I offered the Blessed One my outer robe of patches and received from him his worn-out hempen rag-robes.
sn16.11:14.11 | S: and the Buddha presented me with his worn-out hempen rag robe. | T: (none)
sn16.11:15.1 | S: For if anyone should be rightly called | T: “If, friend, one speaking rightly could say of anyone:
sn16.11:15.2 | S: the Buddha’s bosom son, born from his mouth, born of the teaching, created by the teaching, heir to the teaching, and receiver of his worn-out hempen rag robes, it’s me. | T: ‘He is a son of the Blessed One, born of his breast, born of his mouth, born of the Dhamma, created by the Dhamma, an heir to the Dhamma, a receiver of worn-out hempen rag-robes,’ it is of me that one could rightly say this.
sn16.11:16.1 | S: Whenever I want, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, I enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. … | T: “Friend, to whatever extent I wish, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, I enter and dwell in the first jhana, which is accompanied by thought and examination, with rapture and happiness born of seclusion….
sn16.11:16.2 | P: Ahaṁ kho, āvuso, yāvade ākaṅkhāmi …pe… | T: As in §9, down to:
sn16.11:16.3 | S: (The nine progressive meditations and the five insights should be told in full.) | T: (none)
sn16.11:17.1 | S: I have realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom. And I live having realized it with my own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements. | T: “Friend, by the destruction of the taints, in this very life I enter and dwell in the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, realizing it for myself with direct knowledge.
sn16.11:17.2 | S: Reverend, you might as well think to hide a bull elephant that’s three or three and a half meters tall behind a palm leaf as to hide my six insights.” | T: “Friend, one might just as well think that a bull elephant seven or seven and a half cubits high could be concealed by a palm leaf as think that my six direct knowledges could be concealed.”
sn16.11:18.1 | S: But the nun Thullanandā fell from the spiritual life. | T: But the bhikkhunī Thullananda fell away from the holy life.

## mn12
mn12:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
mn12:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying outside the city of Vesālī in a woodland grove west of the town. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Vesālī in the grove outside the city to the west.
mn12:2.1 | S: Now at that time Sunakkhatta the Licchavi had recently left this teaching and training. | T: Now on that occasion Sunakkhatta, son of the Licchavis, had recently left this Dhamma and Discipline.
mn12:2.2 | S: He was telling a crowd in Vesālī: | T: He was making this statement before the Vesālī assembly:
mn12:2.3 | S: “The ascetic Gotama has no superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones. | T: “The recluse Gotama does not have any superhuman states, any distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.
mn12:2.4 | S: He teaches what he’s worked out by logic, following a line of inquiry, expressing his own perspective. | T: The recluse Gotama teaches a Dhamma merely hammered out by reasoning, following his own line of inquiry as it occurs to him,
mn12:2.5 | S: Regardless of his goal in teaching the Dhamma, it delivers one who applies it to the complete ending of suffering.” | T: and when he teaches the Dhamma to anyone, it leads him when he practises it to the complete destruction of suffering.”
mn12:3.1 | S: Then Venerable Sāriputta robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Vesālī for alms. | T: Then, when it was morning, the venerable Sāriputta dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Vesālī for alms.
mn12:3.2 | S: He heard what Sunakkhatta was saying. | T: Then he heard Sunakkhatta, son of the Licchavis, making this statement before the Vesālī assembly.
mn12:3.6 | S: Then he wandered for alms in Vesālī. After the meal, on his return from almsround, he went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. | T: When he had wandered for alms in Vesālī and had returned from his almsround, after his meal he went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and told the Blessed One what Sunakkhatta was saying.
mn12:4.1 | S: “Sāriputta, Sunakkhatta, that futile man, is angry. | T: The Blessed One said: “Sāriputta, the misguided man Sunakkhatta is angry and his words are spoken out of anger.
mn12:4.2 | S: His words are spoken out of anger. | T: (none)
mn12:4.3 | S: Thinking he criticizes the Realized One, in fact he just praises him. | T: Thinking to discredit the Tathāgata, he actually praises him;
mn12:4.4 | S: For it is praise of the Realized One to say: | T: for it is praise of the Tathāgata to say of him:
mn12:4.5 | S: ‘Regardless of his goal in teaching the Dhamma, it delivers one who applies it to the complete ending of suffering.’ | T: ‘When he teaches the Dhamma to anyone, it leads him when he practises it to the complete destruction of suffering.’
mn12:5.1 | S: But there’s no way Sunakkhatta will infer about me from the teaching: | T: “Sāriputta, this misguided man Sunakkhatta will never infer of me according to Dhamma:
mn12:5.2 | S: ‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ | T: ‘That Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened, blessed.’
mn12:6.1 | S: And there’s no way Sunakkhatta will infer about me from the teaching: | T: “And he will never infer of me according to Dhamma:
mn12:6.2 | S: ‘That Blessed One wields the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying himself and becoming one again; materializing and dematerializing; going unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful; controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity.’ | T: ‘That Blessed One enjoys the various kinds of supernormal power: having been one, he becomes many; having been many, he becomes one; he appears and vanishes; he goes unhindered through a wall, through an enclosure, through a mountain, as though through space; he dives in and out of the earth as though it were water; he walks on water without sinking as though it were earth; seated cross-legged, he travels in space like a bird; with his hand he touches and strokes the moon and sun so powerful and mighty; he wields bodily mastery even as far as the Brahma-world.’
mn12:7.1 | S: And there’s no way Sunakkhatta will infer about me from the teaching: | T: “And he will never infer of me according to Dhamma:
mn12:7.2 | S: ‘That Blessed One, with clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, hears both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far.’ | T: ‘With the divine ear element, which is purified and surpasses the human, that Blessed One hears both kinds of sounds, the heavenly and the human, those that are far as well as near.’
mn12:8.1 | S: And there’s no way Sunakkhatta will infer about me from the teaching: | T: “And he will never infer of me according to Dhamma:
mn12:8.2 | S: ‘That Blessed One understands the minds of other beings and individuals, having encompassed them with his own mind. | T: ‘That Blessed One encompasses with his own mind the minds of other beings, other persons.
mn12:8.3 | S: He understands mind with greed as “mind with greed,” | T: He understands a mind affected by lust as affected by lust and a mind unaffected by lust as unaffected by lust;
mn12:8.4 | S: and mind without greed as “mind without greed.” | T: (none)
mn12:8.5 | S: He understands mind with hate … | T: he understands a mind affected by hate as affected by hate and a mind unaffected by hate as unaffected by hate;
mn12:8.6 | S: mind without hate … | T: (none)
mn12:8.7 | S: mind with delusion … | T: he understands a mind affected by delusion as affected by delusion and a mind unaffected by delusion as unaffected by delusion;
mn12:8.8 | S: mind without delusion … | T: (none)
mn12:8.9 | S: constricted mind … | T: he understands a contracted mind as contracted and a distracted mind as distracted;
mn12:8.10 | S: scattered mind … | T: (none)
mn12:8.11 | S: expansive mind … | T: he understands an exalted mind as exalted and an unexalted mind as unexalted;
mn12:8.12 | S: unexpansive mind … | T: (none)
mn12:8.13 | S: mind that is supreme … | T: (none)
mn12:8.14 | S: mind that is not supreme … | T: he understands a surpassed mind as surpassed and an unsurpassed mind as unsurpassed;
mn12:8.15 | S: mind immersed in samādhi … | T: (none)
mn12:8.16 | S: mind not immersed in samādhi … | T: he understands a concentrated mind as concentrated and an unconcentrated mind as unconcentrated;
mn12:8.17 | S: freed mind as “freed mind,” | T: he understands a liberated mind as liberated and an unliberated mind as unliberated.’
mn12:8.18 | S: and unfreed mind as “unfreed mind.”’ | T: (none)
mn12:9.1 | S: There are these ten powers of a Realized One that the Realized One possesses. With these he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel. | T: Ten Powers of a Tathāgata “Sāriputta, the Tathāgata has these ten Tathāgata’s powers, possessing which he claims the herd-leader’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of Brahmā.
mn12:9.2 | S: What ten? | T: What are the ten?
mn12:10.1 | S: Firstly, the Realized One truly understands the possible as possible, and the impossible as impossible. | T: (1) “Here, the Tathāgata understands as it actually is the possible as possible and the impossible as impossible.
mn12:10.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. Relying on this he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel. | T: And that is a Tathāgata’s power that the Tathāgata has, by virtue of which he claims the herd-leader’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of Brahmā.
mn12:11.1 | S: Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the result of deeds undertaken in the past, future, and present in terms of grounds and causes. | T: (2) “Again, the Tathāgata understands as it actually is the results of actions undertaken, past, future, and present, by way of possibilities and causes.
mn12:11.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … | T: That too is a Tathāgata’s power…
mn12:12.1 | S: Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands where all paths of practice lead. | T: (3) “Again, the Tathāgata understands as it actually is the ways leading to all destinations.
mn12:12.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … | T: That too is a Tathāgata’s power…
mn12:13.1 | S: Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the world with its many and diverse elements. | T: (4) “Again, the Tathāgata understands as it actually is the world with its many and different elements.
mn12:13.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … | T: That too is a Tathāgata’s power…
mn12:14.1 | S: Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the diverse convictions of sentient beings. | T: (5) “Again, the Tathāgata understands as it actually is how beings have different inclinations.
mn12:14.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … | T: That too is a Tathāgata’s power…
mn12:15.1 | S: Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the faculties of other sentient beings and other individuals after encompassing them with his mind. | T: (6) “Again, the Tathāgata understands as it actually is the disposition of the faculties of other beings, other persons.
mn12:15.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … | T: That too is a Tathāgata’s power…
mn12:16.1 | S: Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands corruption, cleansing, and emergence regarding the absorptions, liberations, immersions, and attainments. | T: (7) “Again, the Tathāgata understands as it actually is the defilement, the cleansing, and the emergence in regard to the jhānas, liberations, concentrations, and attainments.
mn12:16.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … | T: That too is a Tathāgata’s power…
mn12:17.1 | S: Furthermore, the Realized One recollects many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. He remembers: ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ And so he recollects his many kinds of past lives, with features and details. | T: (8) “Again, the Tathāgata recollects his manifold past lives, that is, one birth, two births…as Sutta 4, §27…Thus with their aspects and particulars he recollects his manifold past lives.
mn12:17.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … | T: That too is a Tathāgata’s power…
mn12:18.1 | S: Furthermore, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, the Realized One sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. He understands how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. ‘These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’ And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, he sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. He understands how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. | T: (9) “Again, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, the Tathāgata sees beings passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate…as Sutta 4, §29 …and he understands how beings pass on according to their actions.
mn12:18.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … | T: That too is a Tathāgata’s power…
mn12:19.1 | S: Furthermore, the Realized One has realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, and lives having realized it with his own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements. | T: (10) “Again, by realising for himself with direct knowledge, the Tathāgata here and now enters upon and abides in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints.
mn12:19.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. Relying on this he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel. | T: That too is a Tathāgata’s power that the Tathāgata has, by virtue of which he claims the herd-leader’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of Brahmā.
mn12:20.1 | S: A Realized One possesses these ten powers of a Realized One. With these he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel. | T: “The Tathāgata has these ten Tathāgata’s powers, possessing which he claims the herd-leader’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of Brahmā.
mn12:21.1 | S: When I know and see in this way, suppose someone were to say this: | T: “Sāriputta, when I know and see thus, should anyone say of me:
mn12:21.2 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has no superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones. | T: ‘The recluse Gotama does not have any superhuman states, any distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.
mn12:21.3 | S: He teaches what he’s worked out by logic, following a line of inquiry, expressing his own perspective.’ | T: The recluse Gotama teaches a Dhamma merely hammered out by reasoning, following his own line of inquiry as it occurs to him’—
mn12:21.4 | S: Unless they give up that speech and that thought, and let go of that view, they will be placed in hell as if delivered there. | T: unless he abandons that assertion and that state of mind and relinquishes that view, then as surely as if he had been carried off and put there he will wind up in hell.
mn12:21.5 | S: Just as a mendicant accomplished in ethics, immersion, and wisdom would reach enlightenment in this very life, such is the consequence, I say. | T: Just as a bhikkhu possessed of virtue, concentration, and wisdom would here and now enjoy final knowledge, so it will happen in this case, I say,
mn12:21.6 | S: Unless they give up that speech and that thought, and let go of that view, they will be placed in hell as if delivered there. | T: that unless he abandons that assertion and that state of mind and relinquishes that view, then as surely as if he had been carried off and put there he will wind up in hell.
mn12:22.1 | S: Sāriputta, a Realized One has four kinds of self-assurance. With these he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel. | T: Four Kinds of Intrepidity “Sāriputta, the Tathāgata has these four kinds of intrepidity, possessing which he claims the herd-leader’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of Brahmā.
mn12:22.2 | S: What four? | T: What are the four?
mn12:23.1 | S: I see no reason for anyone—whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or the Divinity, or anyone else in the world—to legitimately scold me, saying: ‘You claim to be a fully awakened Buddha, but you don’t understand these things.’ | T: “Here, I see no ground on which any recluse or brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or anyone else at all in the world could, in accordance with the Dhamma, accuse me thus: ‘While you claim to be fully enlightened, you are not fully enlightened about these things.’
mn12:23.2 | S: Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and self-assured. | T: And seeing no ground for that, I abide in safety, fearlessness, and intrepidity.
mn12:24.1 | S: I see no reason for anyone—whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or the Divinity, or anyone else in the world—to legitimately scold me, saying: ‘You claim to have ended all defilements, but you still have these defilements.’ | T: “I see no ground on which any recluse…or anyone at all could accuse me thus: ‘While you claim to be one who has destroyed the taints, you have not destroyed these taints.’
mn12:24.2 | S: Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and self-assured. | T: And seeing no ground for that, I abide in safety, fearlessness, and intrepidity.
mn12:25.1 | S: I see no reason for anyone—whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or the Divinity, or anyone else in the world—to legitimately scold me, saying: ‘The acts that you say are obstructions are not really obstructions for the one who performs them.’ | T: “I see no ground on which any recluse…or anyone at all could accuse me thus: ‘Those things called obstructions by you are not able to obstruct one who engages in them.’
mn12:25.2 | S: Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and self-assured. | T: And seeing no ground for that, I abide in safety, fearlessness, and intrepidity.
mn12:26.1 | S: I see no reason for anyone—whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or the Divinity, or anyone else in the world—to legitimately scold me, saying: ‘Regardless of your goal in teaching the Dhamma, it does not deliver one who applies it to the complete ending of suffering.’ | T: “I see no ground on which any recluse…or anyone at all could accuse me thus: ‘When you teach the Dhamma to someone, it does not lead him when he practises it to the complete destruction of suffering.’
mn12:26.2 | S: Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and self-assured. | T: And seeing no ground for that, I abide in safety, fearlessness,
mn12:27.1 | S: A Realized One possesses these four kinds of self-assurance. With these he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel. | T: and intrepidity. “A Tathāgata has these four kinds of intrepidity, possessing which he claims the herd-leader’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of Brahmā.
mn12:28.1 | S: When I know and see in this way, suppose someone were to say this: | T: “Sāriputta, when I know and see thus,
mn12:28.2 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has no superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones …’ | T: (none)
mn12:28.3 | S: Unless they give up that speech and that thought, and let go of that view, they will be placed in hell as if delivered there. | T: should anyone say of me…he will wind up in hell.
mn12:29.1 | S: Sāriputta, there are these eight assemblies. | T: The Eight Assemblies “Sāriputta, there are these eight assemblies.
mn12:29.2 | S: What eight? | T: What are the eight?
mn12:29.3 | S: The assemblies of aristocrats, brahmins, householders, and ascetics. An assembly of the gods of the four great kings. An assembly of the gods of the thirty-three. An assembly of Māras. An assembly of divinities. | T: An assembly of nobles, an assembly of brahmins, an assembly of householders, an assembly of recluses, an assembly of gods of the heaven of the Four Great Kings, an assembly of gods of the heaven of the Thirty-three, an assembly of Māra’s retinue, an assembly of Brahmās. Possessing these four kinds of intrepidity,
mn12:29.4 | S: These are the eight assemblies. | T: the Tathāgata approaches and enters these eight assemblies.
mn12:29.5 | S: Possessing these four kinds of self-assurance, the Realized One approaches and enters right into these eight assemblies. | T: “I recall having approached many hundred assemblies of nobles…many hundred assemblies of brahmins…many hundred assemblies of householders…many hundred assemblies of recluses…many hundred assemblies of gods of the heaven of the Four Great Kings…many hundred assemblies of gods of the heaven of the Thirty-three…many hundred assemblies of Māra’s retinue…many hundred assemblies of Brahmās.
mn12:29.6 | S: I recall having approached an assembly of hundreds of aristocrats. | T: (none)
mn12:29.7 | S: There I used to sit with them, converse, and engage in discussion. | T: And formerly I had sat with them there and talked with them and held conversations with them,
mn12:29.8 | S: But I don’t see any reason to feel afraid or insecure. | T: yet I see no ground for thinking that fear or timidity might come upon me there.
mn12:29.9 | S: Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and self-assured. | T: (none)
mn12:30.1 | S: I recall having approached an assembly of hundreds of brahmins … | T: (none)
mn12:30.2 | S: householders … | T: (none)
mn12:30.3 | S: ascetics … | T: (none)
mn12:30.4 | S: the gods of the four great kings … | T: (none)
mn12:30.5 | S: the gods of the thirty-three … | T: (none)
mn12:30.6 | S: Māras … | T: (none)
mn12:30.7 | S: divinities. | T: (none)
mn12:30.8 | S: There too I used to sit with them, converse, and engage in discussion. | T: (none)
mn12:30.9 | S: But I don’t see any reason to feel afraid or insecure. | T: And seeing no ground for that,
mn12:30.10 | S: Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and self-assured. | T: I abide in safety, fearlessness, and intrepidity.
mn12:31.1 | S: When I know and see in this way, suppose someone were to say this: | T: “Sāriputta, when I know and see thus,
mn12:31.2 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has no superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones …’ | T: (none)
mn12:31.3 | S: Unless they give up that speech and that thought, and let go of that view, they will be placed in hell as if delivered there. | T: should anyone say of me…he will wind up in hell.
mn12:32.1 | S: Sāriputta, there are these four kinds of reproduction. | T: Four Kinds of Generation “Sāriputta, there are these four kinds of generation.
mn12:32.2 | S: What four? | T: What are the four?
mn12:32.3 | S: Reproduction for creatures born from an egg, from a womb, from moisture, or spontaneously. | T: Egg-born generation, womb-born generation, moisture-born generation, and spontaneous generation. “What is egg-born generation?
mn12:33.1 | S: And what is reproduction from an egg? | T: There are these beings born by breaking out of the shell of an egg;
mn12:33.2 | S: There are beings who are born by breaking out of an eggshell. | T: (none)
mn12:33.3 | S: This is called reproduction from an egg. | T: this is called egg-born generation.
mn12:33.4 | S: And what is reproduction from a womb? | T: What is womb-born generation?
mn12:33.5 | S: There are beings who are born by breaking out of the amniotic sac. | T: There are these beings born by breaking out from the caul;
mn12:33.6 | S: This is called reproduction from a womb. | T: this is called womb-born generation.
mn12:33.7 | S: And what is reproduction from moisture? | T: What is moisture-born generation?
mn12:33.8 | S: There are beings who are born in a rotten fish, a rotten carcass, rotten porridge, a cesspool, or a sump. | T: There are these beings born in a rotten fish, in a rotten corpse, in rotten porridge, in a cesspit, or in a sewer;
mn12:33.9 | S: This is called reproduction from moisture. | T: this is called moisture-born generation.
mn12:33.10 | S: And what is spontaneous reproduction? | T: What is spontaneous generation?
mn12:33.11 | S: Gods, hell-beings, certain humans, and certain beings in the lower realms. | T: There are gods and denizens of hell and certain human beings and some beings in the lower worlds;
mn12:33.12 | S: This is called spontaneous reproduction. | T: this is called spontaneous generation.
mn12:33.13 | S: These are the four kinds of reproduction. | T: These are the four kinds of generation.
mn12:34.1 | S: When I know and see in this way, suppose someone were to say this: | T: “Sāriputta, when I know and see thus,
mn12:34.2 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has no superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones …’ | T: (none)
mn12:34.3 | S: Unless they give up that speech and that thought, and let go of that view, they will be placed in hell as if delivered there. | T: should anyone say of me…he will wind up in hell.
mn12:35.1 | S: There are these five destinations. | T: The Five Destinations and Nibbāna “Sāriputta, there are these five destinations.
mn12:35.2 | S: What five? | T: What are the five?
mn12:35.3 | S: Hell, the animal realm, the ghost realm, humanity, and the gods. | T: Hell, the animal realm, the realm of ghosts, human beings, and gods.
mn12:36.1 | S: I understand hell, and the path and practice that leads to hell. | T: (1) “I understand hell, and the path and way leading to hell. And I also understand how one who has entered this path will,
mn12:36.2 | S: And I understand how someone practicing that way, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, in hell. (2) “I understand the animal realm, and the path and way leading to the animal realm. And I also understand how one who has entered this path will, on the dissolution of the body, after death,
mn12:36.3 | S: I understand the animal realm … | T: reappear in the animal realm.
mn12:36.6 | S: the ghost realm … | T: (3) “I understand the realm of ghosts, and the path and way leading to the realm of ghosts. And I also understand how one who has entered this path will, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in the realm of ghosts.
mn12:36.7 | S: humanity … | T: (4)
mn12:36.8 | P: yathā paṭipanno ca kāyassa bhedā paraṁ maraṇā manussesu upapajjati tañca pajānāmi. | T: “I understand human beings,
mn12:36.9 | S: gods, and the path and practice that leads to the world of the gods. | T: and the path and way leading to the human world. And I also understand how one who has entered this path will,
mn12:36.10 | S: And I understand how someone practicing that way, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. | T: on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear among human beings. (5) “I understand the gods, and the path and way leading to the world of the gods. And I also understand how one who has entered this path will, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in a happy destination, in the heavenly world.
mn12:36.11 | S: And I understand extinguishment, and the path and practice that leads to extinguishment. | T: (6) “I understand Nibbāna, and the path and way leading to Nibbāna.
mn12:36.12 | S: And I understand how someone practicing that way realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, and lives having realized it with their own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements. | T: And I also understand how one who has entered this path will, by realising for himself with direct knowledge, here and now enter upon and abide in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints.
mn12:37.1 | S: When I’ve comprehended the mind of a certain individual, I understand: | T: (1) “By encompassing mind with mind I understand a certain person thus:
mn12:37.2 | S: ‘This individual is practicing in such a way and is riding upon such a path that when their body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.’ | T: ‘This person so behaves, so conducts himself, has taken such a path that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, in hell.’ And then later on, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, I see that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he has reappeared in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition,
mn12:37.3 | S: Some time later I see that they have indeed been reborn in hell, where they experience absolutely painful feelings, sharp and severe. | T: in hell, and is experiencing exclusively painful, racking, piercing feelings.
mn12:37.4 | S: Suppose there was a pit of glowing coals deeper than a man’s height, full of glowing coals that neither flamed nor smoked. | T: Suppose there were a charcoal pit deeper than a man’s height full of glowing coals without flame or smoke;
mn12:37.5 | S: Then along comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and parched. And they have set out on a path that meets with that same pit of coals. | T: and then a man scorched and exhausted by hot weather, weary, parched, and thirsty, came by a path going in one way only and directed to that same charcoal pit.
mn12:37.6 | S: If a person with clear eyes saw them, they’d say: | T: Then a man with good sight on seeing him would say:
mn12:37.7 | S: ‘This person is proceeding in such a way and is riding upon such a path that they will arrive at that very pit of coals.’ | T: ‘This person so behaves, so conducts himself, has taken such a path, that he will come to this same charcoal pit’;
mn12:37.8 | S: Some time later they see that they have indeed fallen into that pit of coals, where they experience absolutely painful feelings, sharp and severe. … | T: and then later on he sees that he has fallen into that charcoal pit and is experiencing exclusively painful, racking, piercing feelings. So too, by encompassing mind with mind…piercing feelings.
mn12:38.1 | S: When I’ve comprehended the mind of a certain individual, I understand: | T: (2) “By encompassing mind with mind I understand a certain person thus:
mn12:38.2 | S: ‘This individual … will be reborn in the animal realm.’ | T: ‘This person so behaves, so conducts himself, has taken such a path that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in the animal realm.’
mn12:38.3 | S: Some time later I see that they have indeed been reborn in the animal realm, where they suffer painful feelings, sharp and severe. | T: And then later on, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, I see that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he has reappeared in the animal realm and is experiencing painful, racking, piercing feelings.
mn12:38.4 | S: Suppose there was a sewer deeper than a man’s height, full to the brim with feces. | T: Suppose there were a cesspit deeper than a man’s height full of filth;
mn12:38.5 | S: Then along comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and parched. And they have set out on a path that meets with that same sewer. | T: and then a man scorched and exhausted by hot weather, weary, parched, and thirsty, came by a path going in one way only and directed to that same cesspit.
mn12:38.6 | S: If a person with clear eyes saw them, they’d say: | T: Then a man with good sight on seeing him would say:
mn12:38.7 | S: ‘This person is proceeding in such a way and is riding upon such a path that they will arrive at that very sewer.’ | T: ‘This person so behaves…that he will come to this same cesspit’;
mn12:38.8 | S: Some time later they see that they have indeed fallen into that sewer, where they suffer painful feelings, sharp and severe. … | T: and then later on he sees that he has fallen into that cesspit and is experiencing painful, racking, piercing feelings. So too, by encompassing mind with mind…piercing feelings.
mn12:39.1 | S: When I’ve comprehended the mind of a certain individual, I understand: | T: (3) “By encompassing mind with mind I understand a certain person thus:
mn12:39.2 | S: ‘This individual … will be reborn in the ghost realm.’ | T: ‘This person so behaves, so conducts himself, has taken such a path that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in the realm of ghosts.’
mn12:39.3 | S: Some time later I see that they have indeed been reborn in the ghost realm, where they experience mostly painful feelings. | T: And then later on…I see that…he has reappeared in the realm of ghosts and is experiencing much painful feeling.
mn12:39.4 | S: Suppose there was a tree growing on rugged ground, with thin foliage casting dappled shade. | T: Suppose there were a tree growing on uneven ground with scanty foliage casting a dappled shadow;
mn12:39.5 | S: Then along comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and parched. And they have set out on a path that meets with that same tree. | T: and then a man scorched and exhausted by hot weather, weary, parched, and thirsty, came by a path going in one way only and directed to that same tree.
mn12:39.6 | S: If a person with clear eyes saw them, they’d say: | T: Then a man with good sight on seeing him would say:
mn12:39.7 | S: ‘This person is proceeding in such a way and is riding upon such a path that they will arrive at that very tree.’ | T: ‘This person so behaves… that he will come to this same tree’;
mn12:39.8 | S: Some time later they see them sitting or lying under that tree, where they experience mostly painful feelings. … | T: and then later on he sees that he is sitting or lying in the shade of that tree experiencing much painful feeling. So too, by encompassing mind with mind …much painful feeling.
mn12:40.1 | S: When I’ve comprehended the mind of a certain individual, I understand: | T: (4) “By encompassing mind with mind I understand a certain person thus:
mn12:40.2 | S: ‘This individual … will be reborn among human beings.’ | T: ‘This person so behaves, so conducts himself, has taken such a path that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear among human beings.’
mn12:40.3 | S: Some time later I see that they have indeed been reborn among human beings, where they experience mostly pleasant feelings. | T: And then later on…I see that…he has reappeared among human beings and is experiencing much pleasant feeling.
mn12:40.4 | S: Suppose there was a tree growing on smooth ground, with abundant foliage casting dense shade. | T: Suppose there were a tree growing on even ground with thick foliage casting a deep shade;
mn12:40.5 | S: Then along comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and parched. And they have set out on a path that meets with that same tree. | T: and then a man scorched and exhausted by hot weather, weary, parched, and thirsty, came by a path going in one way only and directed to that same tree.
mn12:40.6 | S: If a person with clear eyes saw them, they’d say: | T: Then a man with good sight on seeing him would say:
mn12:40.7 | S: ‘This person is proceeding in such a way and is riding upon such a path that they will arrive at that very tree.’ | T: ‘This person so behaves…that he will come to this same tree’;
mn12:40.8 | S: Some time later they see them sitting or lying under that tree, where they experience mostly pleasant feelings. … | T: and then later on he sees that he is sitting or lying in the shade of that tree experiencing much pleasant feeling. So too, by encompassing mind with mind…much pleasant feeling.
mn12:41.1 | S: When I’ve comprehended the mind of a certain individual, I understand: | T: (5) “By encompassing mind with mind I understand a certain person thus:
mn12:41.2 | S: ‘This individual … will be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’ | T: ‘This person so behaves, so conducts himself, has taken such a path that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in a happy destination, in the heavenly world.’
mn12:41.3 | S: Some time later I see that they have indeed been reborn in a heavenly realm, where they experience feelings of absolute happiness. | T: And then later on…I see that…he has reappeared in a happy destination, in the heavenly world, and is experiencing exclusively pleasant feelings.
mn12:41.4 | S: Suppose there was a stilt longhouse with a peaked roof, plastered inside and out, draft-free, with door fastened and window shuttered. | T: Suppose there were a mansion, and it had an upper chamber plastered within and without, shut off, secured by bars, with shuttered windows,
mn12:41.5 | S: And it had a couch spread with woolen covers—shag-piled, pure white, or embroidered with flowers—and spread with a fine deer hide, with a canopy above and red pillows at both ends. | T: and in it there was a couch spread with rugs, blankets, and sheets, with a deer-skin coverlet, with a canopy as well as crimson pillows for both head and feet;
mn12:41.6 | S: Then along comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and parched. And they have set out on a path that meets with that same stilt longhouse. | T: and then a man scorched and exhausted by hot weather, weary, parched, and thirsty, came by a path going in one way only and directed to that same mansion.
mn12:41.7 | S: If a person with clear eyes saw them, they’d say: | T: Then a man with good sight on seeing him would say:
mn12:41.8 | S: ‘This person is proceeding in such a way and is riding upon such a path that they will arrive at that very stilt longhouse.’ | T: ‘This person so behaves…that he will come to this same mansion’;
mn12:41.9 | S: Some time later they see them sitting or lying in that stilt longhouse, where they experience feelings of absolute happiness. … | T: and then later on he sees that he is sitting or lying in that upper chamber in that mansion experiencing exclusively pleasant feelings. So too, by encompassing mind with mind…exclusively pleasant feelings.
mn12:42.1 | S: When I’ve comprehended the mind of a certain individual, I understand: | T: (6) “By encompassing mind with mind I understand a certain person thus:
mn12:42.2 | S: ‘This individual is practicing in such a way and is riding upon such a path that they will realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, and live having realized it with their own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements.’ | T: ‘This person so behaves, so conducts himself, has taken such a path that by realising for himself with direct knowledge, he here and now will enter upon and abide in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints.’
mn12:42.3 | S: Some time later I see that they have indeed realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, and live having realized it with their own insight  in this very life due to the ending of defilements, experiencing feelings of absolute happiness. | T: And then later on I see that by realising for himself with direct knowledge, he here and now enters upon and abides in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints, and is experiencing exclusively pleasant feelings.
mn12:42.4 | S: Suppose there was a lotus pond with clear, sweet, cool water, clean, with smooth banks, delightful. | T: Suppose there were a pond with clean, agreeable, cool water, transparent, with smooth banks, delightful,
mn12:42.5 | S: Nearby was a dense forest grove. | T: and nearby a dense wood;
mn12:42.6 | S: Then along comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and parched. And they have set out on a path that meets with that same lotus pond. | T: and then a man scorched and exhausted by hot weather, weary, parched, and thirsty, came by a path going in one way only towards that same pond.
mn12:42.7 | S: If a person with clear eyes saw them, they’d say: | T: Then a man with good sight on seeing him would say:
mn12:42.8 | S: ‘This person is proceeding in such a way and is riding upon such a path that they will arrive at that very lotus pond.’ | T: ‘This person so behaves…that he will come to this same pond’;
mn12:42.9 | S: Some time later they would see that person after they had plunged into that lotus pond, bathed and drunk. When all their stress, weariness, and heat exhaustion had faded away, they emerged and sat or lay down in that woodland thicket, where they experienced feelings of absolute happiness. | T: and then later on he sees that he has plunged into the pond, bathed, drunk, and relieved all his distress, fatigue, and fever and has come out again and is sitting or lying in the wood experiencing exclusively pleasant feelings.
mn12:42.10 | S: In the same way, when I’ve comprehended the mind of an individual, I understand: | T: So too, by encompassing mind with mind…exclusively pleasant feelings.
mn12:42.11 | S: ‘This individual is practicing in such a way and is riding upon such a path that they will realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, and live having realized it with their own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements.’ | T: (none)
mn12:42.12 | S: Some time later I see that they have indeed realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, and live having realized it with their own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements, experiencing feelings of absolute happiness. | T: (none)
mn12:42.13 | S: These are the five destinations. | T: These are the five destinations.
mn12:43.1 | S: When I know and see in this way, suppose someone were to say this: | T: “Sāriputta, when I know and see thus, should anyone say of me:
mn12:43.2 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has no superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones. | T: ‘The recluse Gotama does not have any superhuman states, any distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.
mn12:43.3 | S: He teaches what he’s worked out by logic, following a line of inquiry, expressing his own perspective.’ | T: The recluse Gotama teaches a Dhamma merely hammered out by reasoning, following his own line of inquiry as it occurs to him’—
mn12:43.4 | S: Unless they give up that speech and that thought, and let go of that view, they will be placed in hell as if delivered there. | T: unless he abandons that assertion and that state of mind and relinquishes that view, then as surely as if he had been carried off and put there he will wind up in hell.
mn12:43.5 | S: Just as a mendicant accomplished in ethics, immersion, and wisdom would reach enlightenment in this very life, such is the consequence, I say. | T: Just as a bhikkhu possessed of virtue, concentration, and wisdom would here and now enjoy final knowledge, so it will happen in this case, I say,
mn12:43.6 | S: Unless they give up that speech and that thought, and let go of that view, they will be placed in hell as if delivered there. | T: that unless he abandons that assertion and that state of mind and relinquishes that view, then as surely as if he had been carried off and put there he will wind up in hell.
mn12:44.1 | S: Sāriputta, I recall having practiced a spiritual path consisting of four factors. | T: The Bodhisatta’s Austerities “Sāriputta, I recall having lived a holy life possessing four factors.
mn12:44.2 | S: I used to be a fervent mortifier, the ultimate fervent mortifier. I used to live rough, the ultimate rough-liver. I used to live in disgust of sin, the ultimate one living in disgust of sin. I used to be secluded, in ultimate seclusion. | T: I have been an ascetic—a supreme ascetic; I have been coarse—supremely coarse; I have been scrupulous—supremely scrupulous; I have been secluded—supremely secluded.
mn12:45.1 | S: And this is what my fervent mortification was like. I went naked, ignoring conventions. I licked my hands, and didn’t come or stop when asked. I didn’t consent to food brought to me, or food prepared specially for me, or an invitation for a meal. | T: “Such was my asceticism, Sāriputta, that I went naked, rejecting conventions, licking my hands, not coming when asked, not stopping when asked; I did not accept food brought or food specially made or an invitation to a meal;
mn12:45.2 | S: I didn’t receive anything from a pot or bowl; or from someone who keeps sheep, or who has a weapon or a shovel in their home; or where a couple is eating; or where there is a woman who is pregnant, breastfeeding, or who lives with a man; or where food for distribution is advertised; or where there’s a hound waiting or flies buzzing. I accepted no fish or meat or beer or wine, and drank no fermented gruel. | T: I received nothing from a pot, from a bowl, across a threshold, across a stick, across a pestle, from two eating together, from a pregnant woman, from a woman giving suck, from a woman in the midst of men, from where food was advertised to be distributed, from where a dog was waiting, from where flies were buzzing; I accepted no fish or meat, I drank no liquor, wine, or fermented brew.
