## mn8
mn8:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
mn8:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
mn8:2.1 | S: Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Mahācunda came out of retreat and went to the Buddha. He bowed, sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha: | T: Then, when it was evening, the venerable Mahā Cunda rose from meditation and went to the Blessed One. After paying homage to the Blessed One he sat down at one side and said to him:
mn8:3.1 | S: “Sir, there are many different views that arise in the world | T: “Venerable sir, various views arise in the world associated either with doctrines of a self or with doctrines about the world.
mn8:3.2 | S: connected with theories of self or with theories of the cosmos. | T: (none)
mn8:3.3 | S: How does a mendicant who is focusing on the starting point give up and let go of these views?” | T: Now does the abandoning and relinquishing of those views come about in a bhikkhu who is attending only to the beginning of his meditative training?”
mn8:3.4 | S: “Cunda, there are many different views that arise in the world | T: “Cunda, as to those various views that arise in the world associated either with doctrines of a self or with doctrines about the world:
mn8:3.5 | S: connected with theories of self or with theories of the cosmos. | T: (none)
mn8:3.6 | S: A mendicant gives up and lets go of these views by truly seeing with right wisdom where they arise, where they settle in, and where they operate as: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ | T: if the object in relation to which those views arise, which they underlie, and which they are exercised upon is seen as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self,’ then the abandoning and relinquishing of those views comes about.
mn8:4.1 | S: It’s possible that a certain mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, might enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: The Eight Attainments “It is possible here, Cunda, that quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, some bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
mn8:4.2 | S: They might think | T: He might think thus:
mn8:4.3 | S: they’re practicing self-effacement. | T: ‘I am abiding in effacement.
mn8:4.4 | S: But in the training of the Noble One these are not called ‘self-effacement’; | T: ’ But it is not these attainments that are called ‘effacement’ in the Noble One’s Discipline:
mn8:4.5 | S: they’re called ‘blissful meditations in this life’. | T: these are called ‘pleasant abidings here and now’ in the Noble One’s Discipline.
mn8:5.1 | S: It’s possible that some mendicant, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, might enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: “It is possible here that with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, some bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second jhāna, which has self-confidence and singleness of mind without applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of concentration.
mn8:5.2 | S: They might think | T: He might think thus:
mn8:5.3 | S: they’re practicing self-effacement. | T: ‘I am abiding in effacement.’
mn8:5.4 | S: But in the training of the Noble One these are not called ‘self-effacement’; | T: (none)
mn8:5.5 | S: they’re called ‘blissful meditations in this life’. | T: But…these are called ‘pleasant abidings here and now’ in the Noble One’s Discipline.
mn8:6.1 | S: It’s possible that some mendicant, with the fading away of rapture, might enter and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, experiencing for themselves the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’ | T: “It is possible here that with the fading away as well of rapture, some bhikkhu abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in the third jhāna, on account of which noble ones announce: ‘He has a pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.’
mn8:6.2 | S: They might think | T: He might think thus:
mn8:6.3 | S: they’re practicing self-effacement. | T: ‘I am abiding in effacement.’
mn8:6.4 | S: But in the training of the Noble One these are not called ‘self-effacement’; | T: (none)
mn8:6.5 | S: they’re called ‘blissful meditations in this life’. | T: But…these are called ‘pleasant abidings here and now’ in the Noble One’s Discipline.
mn8:7.1 | S: It’s possible that some mendicant, with the giving up of pleasure and pain, and the disappearance of former happiness and sadness, might enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. | T: “It is possible here that with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, some bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna, which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
mn8:7.2 | S: They might think | T: He might think thus:
mn8:7.3 | S: they’re practicing self-effacement. | T: ‘I am abiding in effacement.’
mn8:7.4 | S: But in the training of the Noble One these are not called ‘self-effacement’; | T: But it is not these attainments that are called ‘effacement’ in the Noble One’s Discipline:
mn8:7.5 | S: they’re called ‘blissful meditations in this life’. | T: these are called ‘pleasant abidings here and now’ in the Noble One’s Discipline.
mn8:8.1 | S: It’s possible that some mendicant, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite’, might enter and remain in the dimension of infinite space. | T: “It is possible here that with the complete surmounting of perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of sensory impact, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite,’ some bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infinite space.
mn8:8.2 | S: They might think | T: He might think thus:
mn8:8.3 | S: they’re practicing self-effacement. | T: ‘I am abiding in effacement.’
mn8:8.4 | S: But in the training of the Noble One these are not called ‘self-effacement’; | T: But it is not these attainments that are called ‘effacement’ in the Noble One’s Discipline:
mn8:8.5 | S: they’re called ‘peaceful meditations’. | T: these are called ‘peaceful abidings’ in the Noble One’s Discipline.
mn8:9.1 | S: It’s possible that some mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite’, might enter and remain in the dimension of infinite consciousness. | T: “It is possible here that by completely surmounting the base of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite,’ some bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infinite consciousness.
mn8:9.2 | S: They might think | T: He might think thus:
mn8:9.3 | S: they’re practicing self-effacement. | T: ‘I am abiding in effacement.’
mn8:9.4 | S: But in the training of the Noble One these are not called ‘self-effacement’; | T: (none)
mn8:9.5 | S: they’re called ‘peaceful meditations’. | T: But…these are called ‘peaceful abidings’ in the Noble One’s Discipline.
mn8:10.1 | S: It’s possible that some mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing at all’, might enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness. | T: “It is possible here that by completely surmounting the base of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing,’ some bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of nothingness.
mn8:10.2 | S: They might think | T: He might think thus:
mn8:10.3 | S: they’re practicing self-effacement. | T: ‘I am abiding in effacement.’
mn8:10.4 | S: But in the training of the Noble One these are not called ‘self-effacement’; | T: (none)
mn8:10.5 | S: they’re called ‘peaceful meditations’. | T: But…these are called ‘peaceful abidings’ in the Noble One’s Discipline.
mn8:11.1 | S: It’s possible that some mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, might enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. | T: “It is possible here that by completely surmounting the base of nothingness, some bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
mn8:11.2 | S: They might think | T: He might think thus:
mn8:11.3 | S: they’re practicing self-effacement. | T: ‘I am abiding in effacement.’
mn8:11.4 | S: But in the training of the Noble One these are not called ‘self-effacement’; | T: But these attainments are not called ‘effacement’ in the Noble One’s Discipline:
mn8:11.5 | S: they’re called ‘peaceful meditations’. | T: these are called ‘peaceful abidings’ in the Noble One’s Discipline.
mn8:12.0 | S: 1. The Exposition of Self-Effacement | T: Effacement
mn8:12.1 | S: Now in this regard, Cunda, you should work on self-effacement in each of the following ways. | T: “Now, Cunda, here effacement should be practised by you:
mn8:12.2 | S: ‘Others will be cruel, but here we will not be cruel.’ | T: (1) ‘Others will be cruel; we shall not be cruel here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.3 | S: ‘Others will kill living creatures, but here we will not kill living creatures.’ | T: (2) ‘Others will kill living beings; we shall abstain from killing living beings here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.4 | S: ‘Others will steal, but here we will not steal.’ | T: (3) ‘Others will take what is not given; we shall abstain from taking what is not given here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.5 | S: ‘Others will be unchaste, but here we will not be unchaste.’ | T: (4) ‘Others will be uncelibate; we shall be celibate here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.6 | S: ‘Others will lie, but here we will not lie.’ | T: (5) ‘Others will speak falsehood; we shall abstain from false speech here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.7 | S: ‘Others will backbite, but here we will not backbite.’ | T: (6) ‘Others will speak maliciously; we shall abstain from malicious speech here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.8 | S: ‘Others will speak harshly, but here we will not speak harshly.’ | T: (7) ‘Others will speak harshly; we shall abstain from harsh speech here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.9 | S: ‘Others will talk nonsense, but here we will not talk nonsense.’ | T: (8) ‘Others will gossip; we shall abstain from gossip here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.10 | S: ‘Others will be covetous, but here we will not be covetous.’ | T: (9) ‘Others will be covetous; we shall be uncovetous here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.11 | S: ‘Others will have ill will, but here we will not have ill will.’ | T: (10) ‘Others will have ill will; we shall be without ill will here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.12 | S: ‘Others will have wrong view, but here we will have right view.’ | T: (11) ‘Others will be of wrong view; we shall be of right view here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.13 | S: ‘Others will have wrong purpose, but here we will have right purpose.’ | T: (12) ‘Others will be of wrong intention; we shall be of right intention here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.14 | S: ‘Others will have wrong speech, but here we will have right speech.’ | T: (13) ‘Others will be of wrong speech; we shall be of right speech here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.15 | S: ‘Others will have wrong action, but here we will have right action.’ | T: (14) ‘Others will be of wrong action; we shall be of right action here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.16 | S: ‘Others will have wrong livelihood, but here we will have right livelihood.’ | T: (15) ‘Others will be of wrong livelihood; we shall be of right livelihood here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.17 | S: ‘Others will have wrong effort, but here we will have right effort.’ | T: (16) ‘Others will be of wrong effort; we shall be of right effort here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.18 | S: ‘Others will have wrong mindfulness, but here we will have right mindfulness.’ | T: (17) ‘Others will be of wrong mindfulness; we shall be of right mindfulness here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.19 | S: ‘Others will have wrong immersion, but here we will have right immersion.’ | T: (18) ‘Others will be of wrong concentration; we shall be of right concentration here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.20 | S: ‘Others will have wrong knowledge, but here we will have right knowledge.’ | T: (19) ‘Others will be of wrong knowledge; we shall be of right knowledge here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.21 | S: ‘Others will have wrong freedom, but here we will have right freedom.’ | T: (20) ‘Others will be of wrong deliverance; we shall be of right deliverance here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.22 | S: ‘Others will be overcome with dullness and drowsiness, but here we will be rid of dullness and drowsiness.’ | T: (21) ‘Others will be overcome by sloth and torpor; we shall be free from sloth and torpor here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.23 | S: ‘Others will be restless, but here we will not be restless.’ | T: (22) ‘Others will be restless; we shall not be restless here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.24 | S: ‘Others will have doubts, but here we will have gone beyond doubt.’ | T: (23) ‘Others will be doubters; we shall go beyond doubt here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.25 | S: ‘Others will be irritable, but here we will be without anger.’ | T: (24) ‘Others will be angry; we shall not be angry here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.26 | S: ‘Others will be acrimonious, but here we will be without acrimony.’ | T: (25) ‘Others will be resentful; we shall not be resentful here’:
mn8:12.27 | S: ‘Others will be offensive, but here we will be inoffensive.’ | T: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.28 | S: ‘Others will be contemptuous, but here we will be without contempt.’ | T: (26) ‘Others will be contemptuous; we shall not be contemptuous here’: effacement should be practised thus. (27) ‘Others will be insolent; we shall not be insolent here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.29 | S: ‘Others will be jealous, but here we will be without jealousy.’ | T: (28) ‘Others will be envious; we shall not be envious here’:
mn8:12.30 | S: ‘Others will be stingy, but here we will be without stinginess.’ | T: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.31 | S: ‘Others will be devious, but here we will not be devious.’ | T: (29) ‘Others will be avaricious; we shall not be avaricious here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.32 | S: ‘Others will be deceitful, but here we will not be deceitful.’ | T: (30) ‘Others will be fraudulent; we shall not be fraudulent here’: effacement should be practised thus. (31) ‘Others will be deceitful; we shall not be deceitful here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.33 | S: ‘Others will be pompous, but here we will not be pompous.’ | T: (32) ‘Others will be obstinate; we shall not be obstinate here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.34 | S: ‘Others will be arrogant, but here we will not be arrogant.’ | T: (33) ‘Others will be arrogant; we shall not be arrogant here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.35 | S: ‘Others will be hard to admonish, but here we will not be hard to admonish.’ | T: (34) ‘Others will be difficult to admonish; we shall be easy to admonish here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.36 | S: ‘Others will have bad friends, but here we will have good friends.’ | T: (35) ‘Others will have bad friends; we shall have good friends here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.37 | S: ‘Others will be negligent, but here we will be diligent.’ | T: (36) ‘Others will be negligent; we shall be diligent here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.38 | S: ‘Others will be faithless, but here we will have faith.’ | T: (37) ‘Others will be faithless; we shall be faithful here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.39 | S: ‘Others will be conscienceless, but here we will have a sense of conscience.’ | T: (38) ‘Others will be shameless; we shall be shameful here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.40 | S: ‘Others will be imprudent, but here we will be prudent.’ | T: (39) ‘Others will have no fear of wrongdoing; we shall be afraid of wrongdoing here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.41 | S: ‘Others will be unlearned, but here we will be well learned.’ | T: (40) ‘Others will be of little learning; we shall be of great learning here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.42 | S: ‘Others will be lazy, but here we will be energetic.’ | T: (41) ‘Others will be lazy; we shall be energetic here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.43 | S: ‘Others will be unmindful, but here we will be mindful.’ | T: (42) ‘Others will be unmindful; we shall be established in mindfulness here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.44 | S: ‘Others will be witless, but here we will be accomplished in wisdom.’ | T: (43) ‘Others will lack wisdom; we shall possess wisdom here’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:12.45 | S: ‘Others will be attached to their own views, holding them tight, and refusing to let go, but here we will not be attached to our own views, not holding them tight, but will let them go easily.’ | T: (44) ‘Others will adhere to their own views, hold on to them tenaciously, and relinquish them with difficulty; we shall not adhere to our own views or hold on to them tenaciously, but shall relinquish them easily’: effacement should be practised thus.
mn8:13.0 | S: 2. Giving Rise to the Thought | T: Inclination of Mind
mn8:13.1 | S: Cunda, I say that even giving rise to the thought of skillful qualities is very helpful, let alone following that path in body and speech. | T: “Cunda, I say that even the inclination of mind towards wholesome states is of great benefit, so what should be said of bodily and verbal acts conforming to such a state of mind?
mn8:13.2 | S: That’s why you should give rise to the following thoughts. ‘Others will be cruel, but here we will not be cruel.’ | T: Therefore, Cunda: (1) Mind should be inclined thus: ‘Others will be cruel; we shall not be cruel here.’
mn8:13.3 | S: ‘Others will kill living creatures, but here we will not kill living creatures.’ … | T: (2) Mind should be inclined thus: ‘Others will kill living beings; we shall abstain from killing living beings here.’ (3–43) Mind should be inclined thus:…
mn8:13.4 | S: ‘Others will be attached to their own views, holding them tight, and refusing to let go, but here we will not be attached to our own views, not holding them tight, but will let them go easily.’ | T: (44) Mind should be inclined thus: ‘Others will adhere to their own views, hold on to them tenaciously, and relinquish them with difficulty; we shall not adhere to our own views or hold on to them tenaciously, but shall relinquish them easily.’
mn8:14.0 | S: 3. Bypassing | T: Avoidance
mn8:14.1 | S: Cunda, suppose there was a rough path and another smooth path to get around it. | T: “Cunda, suppose there were an uneven path and another even path by which to avoid it;
mn8:14.2 | S: Or suppose there was a rough ford and another smooth ford to get around it. | T: and suppose there were an uneven ford and another even ford by which to avoid it.
mn8:14.3 | S: In the same way, a cruel individual bypasses it by not being cruel. An individual who kills bypasses it by not killing. … | T: So too: (1) A person given to cruelty has non-cruelty by which to avoid it. (2) One given to killing living beings has abstention from killing living beings by which to avoid it. (3) One given to taking what is not given has abstention from taking what is not given by which to avoid it. (4) One given to be uncelibate has celibacy by which to avoid it. (5) One given to false speech has abstention from false speech by which to avoid it. (6) One given to malicious speech has abstention from malicious speech by which to avoid it. (7) One given to harsh speech has abstention from harsh speech by which to avoid it. (8) One given to gossip has abstention from gossip by which to avoid it. (9) One given to covetousness has uncovetousness by which to avoid it. (10) One given to ill will has non-ill will by which to avoid it.
mn8:14.4 | P: Micchādiṭṭhissa purisapuggalassa sammādiṭṭhi hoti parikkamanāya, micchāsaṅkappassa purisapuggalassa sammāsaṅkappo hoti parikkamanāya, micchāvācassa purisapuggalassa sammāvācā hoti parikkamanāya, micchākammantassa purisapuggalassa sammākammanto hoti parikkamanāya, micchāājīvassa purisapuggalassa sammāājīvo hoti parikkamanāya, micchāvāyāmassa purisapuggalassa sammāvāyāmo hoti parikkamanāya, micchāsatissa purisapuggalassa sammāsati hoti parikkamanāya, micchāsamādhissa purisapuggalassa sammāsamādhi hoti parikkamanāya, micchāñāṇissa purisapuggalassa sammāñāṇaṁ hoti parikkamanāya, micchāvimuttissa purisapuggalassa sammāvimutti hoti parikkamanāya. | T: (11) One given to wrong view has right view by which to avoid it. (12) One given to wrong intention has right intention by which to avoid it. (13) One given to wrong speech has right speech by which to avoid it. (14) One given to wrong action has right action by which to avoid it. (15) One given to wrong livelihood has right livelihood by which to avoid it. (16) One given to wrong effort has right effort by which to avoid it. (17) One given to wrong mindfulness has right mindfulness by which to avoid it. (18) One given to wrong concentration has right concentration by which to avoid it. (19) One given to wrong knowledge has right knowledge by which to avoid it. (20) One given to wrong deliverance has right deliverance by which to avoid it. (21) One given to sloth and torpor has freedom from sloth and torpor by which to avoid it. (22) One given to restlessness has non-restlessness by which to avoid it. (23) One given to doubt has the state beyond doubt by which to avoid it. (24) One given to anger has non-anger by which to avoid it. (25) One given to resentment has non-resentment by which to avoid it. (26) One given to contempt has non-contempt by which to avoid it. (27) One given to insolence has non-insolence by which to avoid it. (28) One given to envy has non-envy by which to avoid it. (29) One given to avarice has non-avarice by which to avoid it. (30) One given to fraud has non-fraud by which to avoid it. (31) One given to deceit has non-deceit by which to avoid it. (32) One given to obstinacy has non-obstinacy by which to avoid it. (33) One given to arrogance has non-arrogance by which to avoid it. (34) One given to being difficult to admonish has being easy to admonish by which to avoid it. (35) One given to making bad friends has making good friends by which to avoid it. (36) One given to negligence has diligence by which to avoid it. (37) One given to faithlessness has faith by which to avoid it. (38) One given to shamelessness has shame by which to avoid it. (39) One given to fearlessness of wrongdoing has fear of wrongdoing by which to avoid it. (40) One given to little learning has great learning by which to avoid it. (41) One given to laziness has the arousal of energy by which to avoid it. (42) One given to unmindfulness has the establishment of mindfulness by which to avoid it. (43) One given to lack of wisdom has the acquisition of wisdom by which to avoid it.
mn8:14.5 | S: An individual who is attached to their own views, holding them tight, and refusing to let go, gets around it by not being attached to their own views, not holding them tight, but letting them go easily. | T: (44) One given to adhere to his own views, who holds on to them tenaciously and relinquishes them with difficulty, has non-adherence to his own views, not holding on to them tenaciously and relinquishing them easily, by which to avoid it.
mn8:15.0 | S: 4. Going Up | T: (none)
mn8:15.1 | S: Cunda, all unskillful qualities lead downwards, while all skillful qualities lead upwards. | T: The Way Leading Upwards “Cunda, just as all unwholesome states lead downwards and all wholesome states lead upwards, so too:
mn8:15.2 | S: In the same way, a cruel individual is led upwards by not being cruel. An individual who kills is led upwards by not killing … | T: (1) A person given to cruelty has non-cruelty to lead him upwards. (2) One given to killing living beings has abstention from killing living beings to lead him upwards.
mn8:15.3 | S: An individual who is attached to their own views, holding them tight, and refusing to let go, is led upwards by not being attached to their own views, not holding them tight, but letting them go easily. | T: (3–43) One given to…to lead him upwards. (44) One given to adhere to his own views, who holds on to them tenaciously and relinquishes them with difficulty, has non-adherence to his own views, not holding on to them tenaciously and relinquishing them easily, to lead him upwards.
mn8:16.0 | S: 5. The Exposition by Extinguishment | T: The Way of Extinguishing
mn8:16.1 | S: If you’re sinking in the mud yourself, Cunda, it is quite impossible for you to pull out someone else who is sinking in the mud. | T: “Cunda, that one who is himself sinking in the mud should pull out another who is sinking in the mud is impossible;
mn8:16.2 | S: But if you’re not sinking in the mud yourself, it is quite possible for you to pull out someone else who is sinking in the mud. | T: that one who is not himself sinking in the mud should pull out another who is sinking in the mud is possible.
mn8:16.3 | S: If you’re not tamed, trained, and quenched yourself, it is quite impossible for you to help tame, train, and extinguish someone else. | T: That one who is himself untamed, undisciplined, with defilements unextinguished, should tame another, discipline him, and help extinguish his defilements is impossible;
mn8:16.4 | S: But if you are tamed, trained, and quenched yourself, it is quite possible for you to help tame, train, and extinguish someone else. | T: that one who is himself tamed, disciplined, with defilements extinguished, should tame another, discipline him, and help extinguish his defilements is possible. So too:
mn8:16.5 | S: In the same way, a cruel individual extinguishes it by not being cruel. An individual who kills extinguishes it by not killing. … | T: (1) A person given to cruelty has non-cruelty by which to extinguish it. (2) One given to killing living beings has abstention from killing living beings by which to extinguish it.
mn8:16.12 | P: Abhijjhālussa purisapuggalassa anabhijjhā hoti parinibbānāya. | T: (3–43) One given to…
mn8:16.13 | P: Byāpannacittassa purisapuggalassa abyāpādo hoti parinibbānāya. | T: …by which to extinguish it.
mn8:16.47 | S: An individual who is attached to their own views, holding them tight, and refusing to let go, extinguishes it by not being attached to their own views, not holding them tight, but letting them go easily. | T: (44) One given to adhere to his own views, who holds on to them tenaciously and relinquishes them with difficulty, has non-adherence to his own views, not holding on to them tenaciously and relinquishing them easily, by which to extinguish it.
mn8:17.1 | S: So, Cunda, I’ve taught the expositions by way of self-effacement, arising of thought, bypassing, going up, and extinguishing. | T: Conclusion “So, Cunda, the way of effacement has been taught by me, the way of inclining the mind has been taught by me, the way of avoidance has been taught by me, the way leading upwards has been taught by me, and the way of extinguishing has been taught by me.
mn8:17.2 | S: Out of sympathy, I’ve done what a teacher should do who wants what’s best for their disciples. | T: “What should be done for his disciples out of compassion by a teacher who seeks their welfare and has compassion for them, that I have done for you, Cunda.
mn8:17.3 | S: Here are these roots of trees, and here are these empty huts. Practice absorption, Cunda! Don’t be negligent! Don’t regret it later! This is my instruction.” | T: There are these roots of trees, these empty huts. Meditate, Cunda, do not delay or else you will regret it later. This is our instruction to you.”
mn8:17.4 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: That is what the Blessed One said.
mn8:17.5 | S: Satisfied, Venerable Mahācunda approved what the Buddha said. | T: The venerable Mahā Cunda was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
mn8:17.6 | S: Forty-four items have been stated, | T: (none)
mn8:17.7 | S: organized into five sections. | T: (none)
mn8:17.8 | S: “Effacement” is the name of this discourse, | T: (none)
mn8:17.9 | S: which is deep as the ocean. | T: (none)

## sn22.101
sn22.101:1.1 | S: At Sāvatthī. | T: At Savatthi.
sn22.101:1.2 | S: “Mendicants, I say that the ending of defilements is for one who knows and sees, not for one who does not know or see. | T: “Bhikkhus, I say that the destruction of the taints is for one who knows and sees, not for one who does not know and does not see.
sn22.101:1.3 | S: For one who knows and sees what? | T: For one who knows what, who sees what, does the destruction of the taints come about?
sn22.101:1.4 | S: ‘Such is form, such is the origin of form, such is the disappearance of form. | T: ‘Such is form, such its origin, such its passing away;
sn22.101:1.5 | S: Such is feeling … | T: such is feeling …
sn22.101:1.6 | S: Such is perception … | T: such is perception …
sn22.101:1.7 | S: Such are choices … | T: such are volitional formations …
sn22.101:1.8 | S: Such is consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is the disappearance of consciousness.’ | T: such is consciousness, such its origin, such its passing away’:
sn22.101:1.9 | S: The ending of the defilements is for one who knows and sees this. | T: it is for one who knows thus, for one who sees thus, that the destruction of the taints comes about.
sn22.101:2.1 | S: When a mendicant is not committed to development, they might wish: | T: “Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu does not dwell devoted to development, even though such a wish as this might arise in him:
sn22.101:2.2 | S: ‘If only my mind were freed from the defilements by not grasping!’ Even so, their mind is not freed from defilements by not grasping. | T: ‘Oh, that my mind might be liberated from the taints by nonclinging!’ yet his mind is not liberated from the taints by nonclinging.
sn22.101:2.3 | S: Why is that? | T: For what reason?
sn22.101:2.4 | S: You should say: ‘It’s because they’re undeveloped.’ | T: It should be said: because of nondevelopment. Because of not developing what?
sn22.101:2.5 | S: Undeveloped in what? | T: (none)
sn22.101:2.6 | S: Undeveloped in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, the four right efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven awakening factors, and the noble eightfold path. | T: Because of not developing the four establishments of mindfulness … the four right strivings … the four bases for spiritual power … the five spiritual faculties … the five powers … the seven factors of enlightenment … the Noble Eightfold Path.
sn22.101:3.1 | S: Suppose there was a chicken with eight or ten or twelve eggs. | T: “Suppose, bhikkhus there was a hen with eight, ten, or twelve eggs that she had not covered,
sn22.101:3.2 | S: But she had not properly sat on them to keep them warm and incubated. | T: incubated, and nurtured properly.
sn22.101:3.3 | S: That chicken might wish: | T: Even though such a wish as this might arise in her:
sn22.101:3.4 | S: ‘If only my chicks could break out of the eggshell with their claws and beak and hatch safely!’ | T: ‘Oh, that my chicks might pierce their shells with the points of their claws and beaks and hatch safely!’
sn22.101:3.5 | S: But they can’t break out and hatch safely. | T: yet the chicks are incapable of piercing their shells with the points of their claws and beaks and hatching safely.
sn22.101:3.6 | S: Why is that? | T: For what reason?
sn22.101:3.7 | S: Because that chicken with eight or ten or twelve eggs | T: Because that hen with eight, ten, or twelve eggs had not covered,
sn22.101:3.8 | S: has not properly sat on them to keep them warm and incubated. | T: incubated, and nurtured them properly.
sn22.101:3.9 | S: In the same way, when a mendicant is not committed to development, they might wish: | T: “So too, bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu does not dwell devoted to development, even though such a wish as this might arise in him:
sn22.101:3.10 | S: ‘If only my mind were freed from the defilements by not grasping!’ Even so, their mind is not freed from defilements by not grasping. | T: ‘Oh, that my mind might be liberated from the taints by nonclinging! ’ yet his mind is not liberated from the taints by nonclinging.
sn22.101:3.11 | S: Why is that? | T: For what reason?
sn22.101:3.12 | S: You should say: ‘It’s because they’re undeveloped.’ | T: It should be said: because of nondevelopment. Because of not developing what? Because of not developing …
sn22.101:3.13 | S: Undeveloped in what? | T: (none)
sn22.101:3.14 | S: Undeveloped in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, the four right efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven awakening factors, and the noble eightfold path. | T: the Noble Eightfold Path.
sn22.101:4.1 | S: When a mendicant is committed to development, they might not wish: | T: “Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu dwells devoted to development, even though no such wish as this might arise in him:
sn22.101:4.2 | S: ‘If only my mind were freed from the defilements by not grasping!’ Even so, their mind is freed from defilements by not grasping. | T: ‘Oh, that my mind might be liberated from the taints by nonclinging!’ yet his mind is liberated from the taints by nonclinging.
sn22.101:4.3 | S: Why is that? | T: For what reason?
sn22.101:4.4 | S: You should say: ‘It’s because they are developed.’ | T: It should be said: because of development. Because of developing what?
sn22.101:4.5 | S: Developed in what? | T: (none)
sn22.101:4.6 | S: Developed in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, the four right efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven awakening factors, and the noble eightfold path. | T: Because of developing the four establishments of mindfulness … the four right strivings … the four bases for spiritual power … the five spiritual faculties … the five powers … the seven factors of enlightenment … the Noble Eightfold Path.
sn22.101:5.1 | S: Suppose there was a chicken with eight or ten or twelve eggs. | T: “Suppose, bhikkhus, there was a hen with eight, ten, or twelve eggs that she had covered,
sn22.101:5.2 | S: And she properly sat on them to keep them warm and incubated. | T: incubated, and nurtured properly.
sn22.101:5.3 | S: That chicken might not wish: | T: Even though no such wish as this might arise in her:
sn22.101:5.4 | S: ‘If only my chicks could break out of the eggshell with their claws and beak and hatch safely!’ | T: ‘Oh, that my chicks might pierce their shells with the points of their claws and beaks and hatch safely!’ yet the chicks are capable of piercing their shells with the points of their claws and beaks and of hatching safely.
sn22.101:5.5 | S: But still they can break out and hatch safely. | T: (none)
sn22.101:5.6 | S: Why is that? | T: For what reason?
sn22.101:5.7 | S: Because that chicken with eight or ten or twelve eggs | T: Because that hen with eight, ten, or twelve eggs had covered,
sn22.101:5.8 | S: properly sat on them to keep them warm and incubated. | T: incubated, and nurtured them properly.
sn22.101:5.9 | S: In the same way, when a mendicant is committed to development, they might not wish: | T: “So too, bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu dwells devoted to development, even though no such wish as this might arise in him:
sn22.101:5.10 | S: ‘If only my mind were freed from the defilements by not grasping!’ Even so, their mind is freed from defilements by not grasping. | T: ‘Oh, that my mind might be liberated from the taints by nonclinging! ’ yet his mind is liberated from the taints by nonclinging.
sn22.101:5.11 | S: Why is that? | T: For what reason?
sn22.101:5.12 | S: You should say: ‘It’s because they are developed.’ | T: It should be said: because of development. Because of developing what? Because of developing …
sn22.101:5.13 | S: Developed in what? | T: (none)
sn22.101:5.14 | S: Developed in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, the four right efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven awakening factors, and the noble eightfold path. | T: the Noble Eightfold Path.
sn22.101:6.1 | S: Suppose a mason or their apprentice sees the marks of his fingers and thumb on the handle of his adze. | T: “When, bhikkhus, a carpenter or a carpenter’s apprentice looks at the handle of his adze, he sees the impressions of his fingers and his thumb,
sn22.101:6.2 | S: They don’t know | T: but he does not know:
sn22.101:6.3 | S: how much of the handle was worn away today, how much yesterday, and how much previously. | T: ‘So much of the adze handle has been worn away today, so much yesterday, so much earlier.’
sn22.101:6.4 | S: They just know what has been worn away. | T: But when it has worn away, the knowledge occurs to him that it has worn away.
sn22.101:6.5 | S: In the same way, when a mendicant is committed to development, they don’t know | T: “So too, bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu dwells devoted to development, even though no such knowledge occurs to him:
sn22.101:6.6 | S: how much of the defilements were worn away today, how much yesterday, and how much previously. They just know what has been worn away. | T: ‘So much of my taints has been worn away today, so much yesterday, so much earlier,’ yet when they are worn away, the knowledge occurs to him that they have been worn away.
sn22.101:6.7 | S: Suppose there was a sea-faring ship bound together with ropes. For six months they deteriorated in the water. Then in the cold season it was hauled up on dry land, where the ropes were weathered by wind and sun. When the monsoon clouds soaked it with rain, the ropes would readily collapse and rot away. | T: “Suppose, bhikkhus, there was a seafaring ship bound with rigging that had been worn away in the water for six months. It would be hauled up on dry land during the cold season and its rigging would be further attacked by wind and sun. Inundated by rain from a rain cloud, the rigging would easily collapse and rot away.
sn22.101:6.8 | S: In the same way, when a mendicant is committed to development their fetters readily collapse and rot away.” | T: So too, bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu dwells devoted to development, his fetters easily collapse and rot away.”

## sn35.244
sn35.244:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, when a mendicant truly understands the origin and disappearance of all things that entail suffering, | T: “Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu understands as they really are the origin and the passing away of all states whatsoever that entail suffering,
sn35.244:1.2 | S: then they’ve seen sensual pleasures in such a way that they have no underlying tendency for desire, affection, infatuation, and passion for sensual pleasures. | T: then sensual pleasures have been seen by him in such a way that as he looks at them sensual desire, sensual affection, sensual infatuation, and sensual passion do not lie latent within him in regard to sensual pleasures;
sn35.244:1.3 | S: And they’ve awakened to a way of conduct and a way of living such that, when they live in that way, bad, unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure don’t overwhelm them. | T: then he has comprehended a mode of conduct and manner of dwelling in such a way that as he conducts himself thus and as he dwells thus, evil unwholesome states of covetousness and displeasure do not flow in upon him.
sn35.244:2.1 | S: And how does a mendicant truly understand the origin and disappearance of all things that entail suffering? | T: “And how, bhikkhus, does a bhikkhu understand as they really are the origin and the passing away of all states whatsoever that entail suffering?
sn35.244:2.2 | S: ‘Such is form, such is the origin of form, such is the disappearance of form. | T: ‘Such is form, such its origin, such its passing away;
sn35.244:2.3 | S: Such is feeling … | T: such is feeling …
sn35.244:2.4 | S: perception … | T: such is perception …
sn35.244:2.5 | S: choices … | T: such are volitional formations …
sn35.244:2.6 | S: consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is the disappearance of consciousness.’ | T: such is consciousness, such its origin, such its passing away’:
sn35.244:2.7 | S: That’s how a mendicant truly understands the origin and disappearance of all things that entail suffering. | T: it is in such a way that a bhikkhu understands as they really are the origin and the passing away of all states whatsoever that entail suffering.
sn35.244:3.1 | S: And how has a mendicant seen sensual pleasures in such a way that they have no underlying tendency for desire, affection, infatuation, and passion for sensual pleasures? | T: “And how, bhikkhus, are sensual pleasures seen by a bhikkhu in such a way that as he looks at them sensual desire, sensual affection, sensual infatuation, and sensual passion do not lie latent within him in regard to sensual pleasures?
sn35.244:3.2 | S: Suppose there was a pit of glowing coals deeper than a man’s height, filled with glowing coals that neither flamed nor smoked. Then a person would come along who wants to live and doesn’t want to die, who wants to be happy and recoils from pain. Two strong men would grab each arm and drag them toward the pit of glowing coals. They’d writhe and struggle to and fro. | T: Suppose there is a charcoal pit deeper than a man’s height, filled with glowing coals without flame or smoke. A man would come along wanting to live, not wanting to die, desiring happiness and averse to suffering. Then two strong men would grab him by both arms and drag him towards the charcoal pit. The man would wriggle his body this way and that.
sn35.244:3.3 | S: Why is that? | T: For what reason?
sn35.244:3.4 | S: For that person knows, ‘If I fall in that pit of glowing coals, that will result in my death or deadly pain.’ | T: Because he knows: ‘I will fall into this charcoal pit and I will thereby meet death or deadly suffering.’
sn35.244:3.5 | S: In the same way, when a mendicant has seen sensual pleasures as like a pit of glowing coals, they have no underlying tendency for desire, affection, infatuation, and passion for sensual pleasures. | T: So too, bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu has seen sensual pleasures as similar to a charcoal pit, sensual desire, sensual affection, sensual infatuation, and sensual passion do not lie latent within him in regard to sensual pleasures.
sn35.244:4.1 | S: And how has a mendicant awakened to a way of conduct and a way of living such that, when they live in that way, bad, unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure don’t overwhelm them? | T: “And how, bhikkhus, has a bhikkhu comprehended a mode of conduct and manner of dwelling in such a way that as he conducts himself thus and as he dwells thus, evil unwholesome states of covetousness and displeasure do not flow in upon him?
sn35.244:4.2 | S: Suppose a person was to enter a thicket full of thorns. They’d have thorns before and behind, to the left and right, below and above. So they’d go forward mindfully and come back mindfully, thinking, ‘May I not get any thorns!’ | T: Suppose a man would enter a thorny forest. There would be thorns in front of him, thorns behind him, thorns to his left, thorns to his right, thorns below him, thorns above him. He would go forward mindfully, he would go back mindfully, thinking,
sn35.244:4.3 | S: In the same way, whatever in the world seems nice and pleasant is called a thorn in the training of the Noble One. | T: ‘May no thorn prick me!’ So too, bhikkhus, whatever in the world has a pleasing and agreeable nature is called a thorn in the Noble One’s Discipline.
sn35.244:4.4 | S: Understanding that this is a thorn, they should understand restraint and lack of restraint. | T: Having understood this thus as ‘a thorn,’ one should understand restraint and nonrestraint.
sn35.244:5.1 | S: And how is someone unrestrained? | T: “And how, bhikkhus, is there nonrestraint?
sn35.244:5.2 | S: Take a mendicant who sees a sight with their eyes. If it’s pleasant they hold on to it, but if it’s unpleasant they dislike it. They live with mindfulness of the body unestablished and their heart stunted. | T: Here, having seen a form with the eye, a bhikkhu is intent upon a pleasing form and repelled by a displeasing form. He dwells without having set up mindfulness of the body, with a limited mind,
sn35.244:5.3 | S: And they don’t truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without remainder. | T: and he does not understand as it really is that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, wherein those evil unwholesome states cease without remainder.
sn35.244:5.4 | S: They hear a sound … smell an odor … taste a flavor … feel a touch … | T: Having heard a sound with the ear …
sn35.244:5.5 | S: know an idea with their mind. If it’s pleasant they hold on to it, but if it’s unpleasant they dislike it. They live with mindfulness of the body unestablished and their heart stunted. | T: Having cognized a mental phenomenon with the mind, he is intent upon a pleasing mental phenomenon and repelled by a displeasing mental phenomenon. He dwells without having set up mindfulness of the body, with a limited mind,
sn35.244:5.6 | S: And they don’t truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without remainder. | T: and he does not understand as it really is that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, wherein those evil unwholesome states cease without remainder.
sn35.244:5.7 | S: This is how someone is unrestrained. | T: It is in such a way that there is nonrestraint.
sn35.244:6.1 | S: And how is someone restrained? | T: “And how, bhikkhus, is there restraint?
sn35.244:6.2 | S: Take a mendicant who sees a sight with their eyes. If it’s pleasant they don’t hold on to it, and if it’s unpleasant they don’t dislike it. They live with mindfulness of the body established and a limitless heart. | T: Here, having seen a form with the eye, a bhikkhu is not intent upon a pleasing form and not repelled by a displeasing form. He dwells having set up mindfulness of the body, with a measureless mind,
sn35.244:6.3 | S: And they truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without remainder. | T: and he understands as it really is that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, wherein those evil unwholesome states cease without remainder.
sn35.244:6.4 | S: They hear a sound … smell an odor … taste a flavor … feel a touch … | T: Having heard a sound with the ear …
sn35.244:6.5 | S: know an idea with their mind. If it’s pleasant they don’t hold on to it, and if it’s unpleasant they don’t dislike it. They live with mindfulness of the body established and a limitless heart. | T: Having cognized a mental phenomenon with the mind, he is not intent upon a pleasing mental phenomenon and not repelled by a displeasing mental phenomenon. He dwells having set up mindfulness of the body, with a measureless mind,
sn35.244:6.6 | S: And they truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without remainder. | T: and he understands as it really is that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, wherein those evil unwholesome states cease without remainder.
sn35.244:6.7 | S: This is how someone is restrained. | T: It is in such a way that there is restraint.
sn35.244:7.1 | S: Perhaps while that mendicant is conducting themselves and living in this way, bad, unskillful memories and thoughts that tighten the fetters arise every so often due to loss of mindfulness. Slowly mindfulness arises, but then they quickly give up, dispel, eliminate, and obliterate those thoughts. | T: “When, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu is conducting himself and dwelling in such a way, if occasionally, due to a lapse of mindfulness, evil unwholesome memories and intentions connected with the fetters arise in him, slow might be the arising of his mindfulness, but then he quickly abandons them, dispels them, puts an end to them, obliterates them.
sn35.244:8.1 | S: Suppose there was an iron cauldron that had been heated all day, and a person let two or three drops of water fall onto it. Slowly the drops fall, but then they quickly dry up and evaporate. | T: Suppose a man let two or three drops of water fall onto an iron plate heated for a whole day. Slow might be the falling of the water drops, but then they would quickly vaporize and vanish.
sn35.244:8.2 | S: In the same way, perhaps while that mendicant is conducting themselves and living in this way, bad, unskillful memories and thoughts that tighten the fetters arise every so often due to loss of mindfulness. Slowly mindfulness arises, but then they quickly give up, dispel, eliminate, and obliterate those thoughts. | T: So too, when a bhikkhu is conducting himself and dwelling in such a way … slow might be the arising of his mindfulness, but then he quickly abandons them, dispels them, puts an end to them, obliterates them.
sn35.244:8.3 | S: This is how a mendicant has awakened to a way of conduct and a way of living such that, when they live in that way, bad, unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure don’t overwhelm them. | T: “Thus a bhikkhu has comprehended a mode of conduct and manner of dwelling in such a way that as he conducts himself and as he dwells thus, evil unwholesome states of covetousness and displeasure do not flow in upon him.
sn35.244:8.4 | S: While that mendicant conducts themselves in this way and lives in this way, it may be that rulers or their chief ministers, friends or colleagues, relatives or family would invite them to accept wealth, saying, | T: “When a bhikkhu is conducting himself thus and dwelling thus, kings or royal ministers, friends or colleagues, relatives or kinsmen, might invite him to accept wealth, saying:
sn35.244:8.5 | S: ‘Please, my man, why let these ocher robes torment you? | T: ‘Come, good man, why let these saffron robes weigh you down?
sn35.244:8.6 | S: Why follow the practice of shaving your head and carrying an alms bowl? | T: Why roam around with a shaven head and a begging bowl?
sn35.244:8.7 | S: Come, return to a lesser life, enjoy wealth, and make merit!’ | T: Come, having returned to the lower life, enjoy wealth and do meritorious deeds.’
sn35.244:8.8 | S: But it is quite impossible for a mendicant who conducts themselves in this way and lives in this way to resign the training and return to a lesser life. | T: Indeed, bhikkhus, when that bhikkhu is conducting himself thus and dwelling thus, it is impossible that he will give up the training and return to the lower life.
sn35.244:9.1 | S: Suppose that, although the Ganges River slants, slopes, and inclines to the east, a large crowd were to come along with a spade and basket, saying: ‘We’ll make this Ganges Riiver slant, slope, and incline to the west!’ | T: “Suppose, bhikkhus, that when the river Ganges slants, slopes, and inclines towards the east, a great crowd of people would come along bringing a shovel and basket, thinking: ‘We will make this river Ganges slant, slope, and incline towards the west.’ What do you think, bhikkhus, would that great crowd of people be able to make the river Ganges slant, slope, and incline towards the west?”
sn35.244:9.2 | S: What do you think, mendicants? | T: “No, venerable sir.
sn35.244:9.3 | S: Would they still succeed?” | T: (none)
sn35.244:9.4 | S: “No, sir. | T: (none)
sn35.244:9.5 | S: Why is that? | T: For what reason?
sn35.244:9.6 | S: The Ganges River slants, slopes, and inclines to the east. | T: Because the river Ganges slants, slopes, and inclines towards the east,
sn35.244:9.7 | S: It’s not easy to make it slant, slope, and incline to the west. | T: and it is not easy to make it slant, slope, and incline towards the west.
sn35.244:9.8 | S: That large crowd will eventually get weary and frustrated.” | T: That great crowd of people would only reap fatigue and vexation.”
sn35.244:9.9 | S: “In the same way, while that mendicant conducts themselves in this way and lives in this way, it may be that rulers or their chief ministers, friends or colleagues, relatives or family should invite them to accept wealth, saying, | T: “So too, bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu is conducting himself thus and dwelling thus, kings or royal ministers, friends or colleagues, relatives or kinsmen, might invite him to accept wealth …
sn35.244:9.10 | S: ‘Please, my man, why let these ocher robes torment you? | T: (none)
sn35.244:9.11 | S: Why follow the practice of shaving your head and carrying an alms bowl? | T: (none)
sn35.244:9.12 | S: Come, return to a lesser life, enjoy wealth, and make merit!’ | T: (none)
sn35.244:9.13 | S: But it is quite impossible for a mendicant who conducts themselves in this way and lives in this way to resign the training and return to a lesser life. | T: but it is impossible that he will give up the training and return to the lower life.
sn35.244:9.14 | S: Why is that? | T: For what reason?
sn35.244:9.15 | S: Because for a long time that mendicant’s mind has slanted, sloped, and inclined to seclusion. So it’s impossible for them to return to a lesser life.” | T: Because for a long time his mind has slanted, sloped, and inclined towards seclusion. Thus it is impossible that he will give up the training and return to the lower life.”

