## an3.46
an3.46:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, when ethical renunciates are supported by a town or village, | T: “Bhikkhus, when virtuous renunciants dwell in dependence on a village or a town,
an3.46:1.2 | S: the people there brim with much merit in three ways. | T: the people there generate much merit in three ways.
an3.46:1.3 | S: What three? | T: What three?
an3.46:1.4 | S: By way of body, speech, and mind. | T: By body, speech, and mind.
an3.46:1.5 | S: When ethical renunciates are supported by a town or village, | T: When virtuous renunciants dwell in dependence on a village or a town,
an3.46:1.6 | S: the people there brim with much merit in these three ways.” | T: the people there generate much merit in these three ways.”

## an3.49
an3.49:1.1 | S: “In three situations, mendicants, you should be keen. | T: “Bhikkhus, in three cases ardor should be exercised.
an3.49:1.2 | S: What three? | T: What three?
an3.49:1.3 | S: You should be keen to prevent bad, unskillful qualities from arising. You should be keen to give rise to skillful qualities. And you should be keen to endure physical pain—sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant, disagreeable, life-threatening. | T: (1) Ardor should be exercised for the non-arising of unarisen bad unwholesome qualities. (2) Ardor should be exercised for the arising of unarisen wholesome qualities. (3) Ardor should be exercised for enduring arisen bodily feelings that are painful, racking, sharp, piercing, harrowing, disagreeable, sapping one’s vitality.
an3.49:1.4 | S: In these three situations, you should be keen. | T: In these three cases ardor should be exercised.
an3.49:2.1 | S: It’s a mendicant who is keen to prevent bad, unskillful qualities from arising. They’re keen to give rise to skillful qualities. And they’re keen to endure physical pain—sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant, disagreeable, life-threatening. | T: “When a bhikkhu exercises ardor for the non-arising of unarisen bad unwholesome qualities, for the arising of unarisen wholesome qualities, and for enduring arisen bodily feelings that are painful, racking, sharp, piercing, harrowing, disagreeable, sapping one’s vitality,
an3.49:2.2 | S: This is called a mendicant who is keen, alert, and mindful so as to rightly make an end of suffering.” | T: he is called a bhikkhu who is ardent, alert, and mindful in order to make a complete end of suffering.”

## an3.4
an3.4:1.1 | S: “A fool is known by three things. | T: “Bhikkhus, one who possesses three qualities should be known as a fool.
an3.4:1.2 | S: What three? | T: What three?
an3.4:1.3 | S: They don’t recognize when they’ve made a mistake. When they do recognize it they don’t deal with it properly. And when someone else confesses a mistake to them, they don’t accept it properly. | T: (1) He does not see his transgression as a transgression. (2) When he sees his transgression as a transgression, he does not make amends for it in accordance with the Dhamma. (3) When another person confesses a transgression to him, he does not accept it in accordance with the Dhamma.
an3.4:1.4 | S: These are the three things by which a fool is known. | T: One who possesses these three qualities should be known as a fool.
an3.4:2.1 | S: An astute person is known by three things. | T: “One who possesses three qualities should be known as a wise person.
an3.4:2.2 | S: What three? | T: What three?
an3.4:2.3 | S: They recognize when they’ve made a mistake. When they recognize it they deal with it properly. And when someone else confesses a mistake to them, they accept it properly. | T: (1) He sees a transgression as a transgression. (2) When he sees a transgression as a transgression, he makes amends for it in accordance with the Dhamma. (3) When another person confesses a transgression to him, he accepts it in accordance with the Dhamma.
an3.4:2.4 | S: These are the three things by which an astute person is known. | T: One who possesses these three qualities should be known as a wise person.
an3.4:2.5 | S: So you should train …” | T: “Therefore … It is in this way that you should train yourselves.”

## an3.53
an3.53:1.1 | S: Then a brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. Seated to one side he said to the Buddha: | T: Then a certain brahmin approached the Blessed One … and said to him:
an3.53:1.2 | S: “Worthy Gotama, they speak of ‘a teaching apparent in the present life’. | T: “Master Gotama, it is said: ‘A directly visible Dhamma, a directly visible Dhamma.’
an3.53:1.3 | S: In what way is the teaching apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves?” | T: In what way is the Dhamma directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise?”
an3.53:2.1 | S: “A greedy person, overcome and overwhelmed by greed, intends to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. | T: (1) “Brahmin, one excited by lust, overcome by lust, with mind obsessed by it, intends for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, and for the affliction of both, and he experiences mental suffering and dejection.
an3.53:2.2 | S: When greed has been given up, they don’t intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They don’t experience mental pain and sadness. | T: But when lust is abandoned, he does not intend for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both, and he does not experience mental suffering and dejection.
an3.53:2.7 | S: This is how the teaching is apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves. | T: It is in this way that the Dhamma is directly visible….
an3.53:3.1 | S: A hateful person, overcome by hate, intends to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. | T: (2) “One full of hate, overcome by hatred, with mind obsessed by it, intends for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, and for the affliction of both, and he experiences mental suffering and dejection.
an3.53:3.2 | S: When hate has been given up, they don’t intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They don’t experience mental pain and sadness. | T: But when hatred is abandoned, he does not intend for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both, and he does not experience mental suffering and dejection.
an3.53:3.3 | S: This, too, is how the teaching is apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves. | T: It is in this way, too, that the Dhamma is directly visible….
an3.53:4.1 | S: A deluded person, overcome by delusion, intends to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. | T: (3) “One who is deluded, overcome by delusion, with mind obsessed by it, intends for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, and for the affliction of both, and he experiences mental suffering and dejection.
an3.53:4.2 | S: When delusion has been given up, they don’t intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They don’t experience mental pain and sadness. | T: But when delusion is abandoned, he does not intend for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both, and he does not experience mental suffering and dejection.
an3.53:4.3 | S: This, too, is how the teaching is apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.” | T: It is in this way, too, that the Dhamma is directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.”
an3.53:5.1 | S: “Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! | T: “Excellent, Master Gotama! Excellent, Master Gotama!
an3.53:5.2 | S: As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, worthy Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. | T: Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the darkness so those with good eyesight can see forms.
an3.53:5.3 | S: I go for refuge to the worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. | T: I now go for refuge to Master Gotama, to the Dhamma, and to the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
an3.53:5.4 | S: From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” | T: Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”

## an3.54
an3.54:1.1 | S: Then a brahmin wanderer went up to the Buddha … Seated to one side he said to the Buddha: | T: Then a certain brahmin wanderer approached the Blessed One … and said to him:
an3.54:1.2 | S: “Worthy Gotama, they speak of ‘a teaching apparent in the present life’. | T: “Master Gotama, it is said: ‘A directly visible Dhamma, a directly visible Dhamma.’
an3.54:1.3 | S: In what way is the teaching apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves?” | T: In what way is the Dhamma directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise?”
an3.54:2.1 | S: “A greedy person, overcome by greed, intends to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. | T: (1) “Brahmin, one excited by lust, overcome by lust, with mind obsessed by it, intends for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both, and he experiences mental suffering and dejection.
an3.54:2.2 | S: When greed has been given up, they don’t intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They don’t experience mental pain and sadness. | T: But when lust is abandoned, he does not intend for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both, and he does not experience mental suffering and dejection.
an3.54:3.1 | S: A greedy person does bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: One excited by lust, overcome by lust, with mind obsessed by it, engages in misconduct by body, speech, and mind.
an3.54:3.2 | S: When greed has been given up, they don’t do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: But when lust is abandoned, he does not engage in misconduct by body, speech, and mind.
an3.54:4.1 | S: A greedy person doesn’t truly understand what’s for their own good, the good of another, or the good of both. | T: One excited by lust, overcome by lust, with mind obsessed by it, does not understand as it really is his own good, the good of others, or the good of both.
an3.54:4.2 | S: When greed has been given up, they truly understand what’s for their own good, the good of another, or the good of both. | T: But when lust is abandoned, he understands as it really is his own good, the good of others, and the good of both.
an3.54:4.3 | S: This is how the teaching is apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves. | T: It is in this way, brahmin, that the Dhamma is directly visible … to be personally experienced by the wise.
an3.54:5.1 | S: A hateful person … | T: (2) “One full of hate, overcome by hatred …
an3.54:5.2 | S: A deluded person, overcome by delusion, intends to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. | T: (3) “One who is deluded, overcome by delusion, with mind obsessed by it, intends for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both, and he experiences mental suffering and dejection.
an3.54:5.3 | S: When delusion has been given up, they don’t intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They don’t experience mental pain and sadness. | T: But when delusion is abandoned, he does not intend for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both, and he does not experience mental suffering and dejection.
an3.54:6.1 | S: A deluded person does bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: One who is deluded, overcome by delusion, with mind obsessed by it, engages in misconduct by body, speech, and mind.
an3.54:6.2 | S: When delusion has been given up, they don’t do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: But when delusion is abandoned, he does not engage in misconduct by body, speech, and mind.
an3.54:7.1 | S: A deluded person doesn’t truly understand what’s for their own good, the good of another, or the good of both. | T: One who is deluded, overcome by delusion, with mind obsessed by it, does not understand as it really is his own good, the good of others, or the good of both.
an3.54:7.2 | S: When delusion has been given up, they truly understand what’s for their own good, the good of another, or the good of both. | T: But when delusion is abandoned, he understands as it really is his own good, the good of others, and the good of both.
an3.54:7.3 | S: This, too, is how the teaching is apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.” | T: It is in this way, too, that the Dhamma is directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.”
an3.54:8.1 | S: “Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! … | T: “Excellent, Master Gotama! …
an3.54:8.2 | S: From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” | T: Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”

## an3.55
an3.55:1.1 | S: Then the brahmin Jānussoṇi went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: | T: Then the brahmin Jāṇussoṇī approached the Blessed One … and said to him:
an3.55:1.2 | S: “Worthy Gotama, they say that ‘extinguishment is apparent in the present life’. | T: “Master Gotama, it is said: ‘Directly visible nibbāna, directly visible nibbāna.’
an3.55:1.3 | S: In what way is extinguishment apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves?” | T: In what way is nibbāna directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise?”
an3.55:2.1 | S: “A greedy person, overcome by greed, intends to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. | T: (1) “Brahmin, one excited by lust, overcome by lust, with mind obsessed by it, intends for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both, and he experiences mental suffering and dejection.
an3.55:2.2 | S: When greed has been given up, they don’t intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They don’t experience mental pain and sadness. | T: But when lust is abandoned, he does not intend for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both, and he does not experience mental suffering and dejection.
an3.55:2.3 | S: This is how extinguishment is apparent in the present life. | T: It is in this way that nibbāna is directly visible.
an3.55:3.1 | S: A hateful person … | T: (2)
an3.55:3.2 | S: A deluded person, overcome by delusion, intends to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. | T: “One full of hate, overcome by hatred … (3) “One who is deluded, overcome by delusion, with mind obsessed by it, intends for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both, and he experiences mental suffering and dejection.
an3.55:3.3 | S: When delusion has been given up, they don’t intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They don’t experience mental pain and sadness. | T: But when delusion is abandoned, he does not intend for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both, and he does not experience mental suffering and dejection.
an3.55:3.4 | S: This, too, is how extinguishment is apparent in the present life. | T: It is in this way, too, that nibbāna is directly visible.
an3.55:4.1 | S: When you experience the ending of greed, hate, and delusion without remainder, | T: “When, brahmin, one experiences the remainderless destruction of lust, the remainderless destruction of hatred, and the remainderless destruction of delusion,
an3.55:4.2 | S: that’s how extinguishment is apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.” | T: it is in this way, too, that nibbāna is directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.”
an3.55:5.1 | S: “Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! … | T: “Excellent, Master Gotama! …
an3.55:5.2 | S: From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” | T: Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”

## an3.56
an3.56:1.1 | S: Then a certain well-to-do brahmin went up to the Buddha, and seated to one side he said to him: | T: Then a certain affluent brahmin approached the Blessed One … and said to him:
an3.56:1.2 | S: “Worthy Gotama, I have heard that brahmins of the past who were elderly and senior, the tutors of tutors, said: | T: “Master Gotama, I have heard older brahmins who are aged, burdened with years, teachers of teachers, saying:
an3.56:1.3 | S: ‘In the old days this world was so full of humans you’d think they were squashed together. The villages, towns, and capital cities were no more than a chicken’s flight apart.’ | T: ‘In the past this world was so thickly populated one would think there was no space between people. The villages, towns, and capital cities were so close that cocks could fly between them.’
an3.56:1.4 | S: What is the cause, worthy Gotama, what is the reason why these days human numbers have dwindled, a decline in population is evident, and whole villages, towns, cities, and countries have disappeared?” | T: Why is it, Master Gotama, that at present the number of people has declined, depopulation is seen, and villages, towns, cities, and districts have vanished?”
an3.56:2.1 | S: “These days, brahmin, humans just love illicit desire. They’re overcome by immoral greed, and mired in wrong religious teachings. | T: (1) “At present, brahmin, people are excited by illicit lust, overcome by unrighteous greed, afflicted by wrong Dhamma.
an3.56:2.2 | S: Taking up sharp knives, they murder each other. And so many people perish. | T: As a result, they take up weapons and slay one another. Hence many people die.
an3.56:2.3 | S: This is the cause, this is the reason why these days human numbers have dwindled. | T: This is a reason why at present the number of people has declined, depopulation is seen, and villages, towns, cities, and districts have vanished.
an3.56:3.1 | S: Furthermore, because these days humans just love illicit desire … | T: (2) “Again, at present people are excited by illicit lust, overcome by unrighteous greed, afflicted by wrong Dhamma.
an3.56:3.2 | S: the heavens don’t provide enough rain, | T: When this happens, sufficient rain does not fall.
an3.56:3.3 | S: so there’s famine, a bad harvest, with crops blighted and turned to straw. | T: As a result, there is a famine, a scarcity of grain; the crops become blighted and turn to straw.
an3.56:3.4 | S: And so many people perish. | T: Hence many people die.
an3.56:3.5 | S: This is the cause, this is the reason why these days human numbers have dwindled. | T: This is another reason why at present the number of people has declined, depopulation is seen, and villages, towns, cities, and districts have vanished.
an3.56:4.1 | S: Furthermore, because these days humans just love illicit desire … | T: (3) “Again, at present people are excited by illicit lust, overcome by unrighteous greed, afflicted by wrong Dhamma.
an3.56:4.2 | S: native spirits let vicious monsters loose. And so many humans perish. | T: When this happens, the yakkhas release wild spirits. Hence many people die.
an3.56:4.3 | S: This is the cause, this is the reason why these days human numbers have dwindled.” | T: This is yet another reason why at present the number of people has declined, depopulation is seen, and villages, towns, cities, and districts have vanished.”
an3.56:5.1 | S: “Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! … | T: “Excellent, Master Gotama! …
an3.56:5.2 | S: From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” | T: Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”

## an3.5
an3.5:1.1 | S: “A fool is known by three things. | T: “Bhikkhus, one who possesses three qualities should be known as a fool.
an3.5:1.2 | S: What three? | T: What three?
an3.5:1.3 | S: They ask a question irrationally. They answer a question irrationally. And when someone else answers a question rationally—with well-rounded, coherent, and relevant words and phrases—they disagree with it. | T: (1) He formulates a question carelessly; (2) he replies to a question carelessly; (3) when another person replies to a question carefully, with well-rounded and coherent words and phrases, he does not approve of it.
an3.5:1.4 | S: These are the three things by which a fool is known. | T: One who possesses these three qualities should be known as a fool.
an3.5:2.1 | S: An astute person is known by three things. | T: “One who possesses three qualities should be known as a wise person.
an3.5:2.2 | S: What three? | T: What three?
an3.5:2.3 | S: They ask a question rationally. They answer a question rationally. And when someone else answers a question rationally—with well-rounded, coherent, and relevant words and phrases—they agree with it. | T: (1) He formulates a question carefully; (2) he replies to a question carefully; (3) when another person replies to a question carefully, with well-rounded and coherent words and phrases, he approves of it.
an3.5:2.4 | S: These are the three things by which an astute person is known. | T: One who possesses these three qualities should be known as a wise person.
an3.5:2.5 | S: So you should train …” | T: “Therefore … It is in this way that you should train yourselves.”

## an3.63
an3.63:1.1 | S: At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he arrived at a village of the Kosalan brahmins named Venāgapura. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering on tour among the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of bhikkhus when he reached the Kosalan brahmin village named Venāgapura.
an3.63:1.2 | S: The brahmins and householders of Venāgapura heard: | T: The brahmin householders of Venāgapura heard:
an3.63:1.3 | S: “It seems the ascetic Gotama—a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family—has arrived at Venāgapura. | T: “It is said that the ascetic Gotama, the son of the Sakyans who went forth from a Sakyan family, has arrived at Venāgapura.
an3.63:1.4 | S: He has this good reputation: | T: Now a good report about that Master Gotama has circulated thus:
an3.63:1.5 | S: ‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ | T: ‘That Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.
an3.63:1.6 | S: He has realized with his own insight this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—and he makes it known to others. | T: Having realized by his own direct knowledge this world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans, he makes it known to others.
an3.63:1.7 | S: He teaches Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. | T: He teaches a Dhamma that is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing; he reveals a spiritual life that is perfectly complete and pure.’
an3.63:1.8 | S: It’s good to see such perfected ones.” | T: Now it is good to see such arahants.”
an3.63:2.1 | S: Then the brahmins and householders of Venāgapura went up to the Buddha. Before sitting down to one side, some bowed, some exchanged greetings and polite conversation, some held up their cupped palms toward the Buddha, some announced their name and clan, while some kept silent. Then the brahmin Vacchagotta of Venāgapura said to the Buddha: | T: Then the brahmin householders of Venāgapura approached the Blessed One. Some paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down to one side; some exchanged greetings with him and, when they had concluded their greetings and cordial talk, sat down to one side; some reverentially saluted him and sat down to one side; some pronounced their name and clan and sat down to one side; some kept silent and sat down to one side. The brahmin Vacchagotta of Venāgapura then said to the Blessed One:
an3.63:3.1 | S: “It’s incredible, worthy Gotama, it’s amazing, | T: “It is astounding and amazing, Master Gotama,
an3.63:3.2 | S: how your faculties are so very clear, and the complexion of your skin is pure and bright. | T: how Master Gotama’s faculties are tranquil and the color of his skin is pure and bright.
an3.63:3.3 | S: It’s like a golden brown jujube in the autumn, | T: Just as a yellow jujube fruit in the autumn is pure and bright,
an3.63:3.4 | P: evamevaṁ bhoto gotamassa vippasannāni indriyāni parisuddho chavivaṇṇo pariyodāto. | T: so Master Gotama’s faculties are tranquil and the color of his skin is pure and bright.
an3.63:3.5 | S: or a ripe palmyra fruit freshly plucked from the stalk, | T: Just as a palm fruit that has just been removed from its stalk is pure and bright,
an3.63:3.6 | P: evamevaṁ bhoto gotamassa vippasannāni indriyāni parisuddho chavivaṇṇo pariyodāto. | T: so Master Gotama’s faculties are tranquil and the color of his skin is pure and bright.
an3.63:3.7 | S: or a pendant of Black Plum River gold, fashioned by a deft smith, well-wrought in the forge, and placed on a cream rug where it shines and glows and dazzles. | T: Just as an ornament of finest gold, well prepared by a skilled goldsmith and very skillfully wrought in the furnace, placed on red brocade, shines and beams and radiates,
an3.63:3.8 | S: In the same way, your faculties are so very clear, and the complexion of your skin is pure and bright. | T: so Master Gotama’s faculties are tranquil and the color of his skin is pure and bright.
an3.63:3.9 | S: Surely the worthy Gotama gets when he wants, without trouble or difficulty, various kinds of high and luxurious bedding, such as: | T: “Whatever high and luxurious kinds of bedding there are—that is,
an3.63:3.10 | S: sofas, couches, woolen covers—shag-piled, colorful, white, embroidered with flowers, quilted, embroidered with animals, double or single fringed—and silk covers studded with gems, as well as silken sheets, wollen carpets, rugs for elephants, horses, or chariots, black antelope hides and woven rugs, and spreads of fine deer hide, with a canopy above and red cushions at both ends.” | T: a sofa, a divan, a long-haired coverlet, a coverlet of diverse colors, a white coverlet, a woolen coverlet with floral designs, a quilt of cotton wool, a woolen coverlet ornamented with animal figures, a woolen coverlet with double borders, a woolen coverlet with a single border, a silken sheet studded with gems, a sheet made with silk threads and studded with gems, a dancer’s rug, an elephant rug, a horse rug, a chariot rug, a rug of antelope hide, a spread made of the hide of the kadali-deer, a bed with a canopy above and red bolsters at both ends—Master Gotama surely gains them at will, without trouble or difficulty.”
an3.63:4.1 | S: “Brahmin, these various kinds of high and luxurious bedding | T: “Brahmin, those high and luxurious kinds of bedding are rarely obtained by those who have gone forth,
an3.63:4.3 | S: are hard for renunciates to find. And even if they do get them, they’re not allowed. | T: and if they are obtained, they are not allowed.
an3.63:5.1 | S: There are, brahmin, these three high and luxurious beds that I get these days when I want, without trouble or difficulty. | T: “But, brahmin, there are three kinds of high and luxurious beds that at present I gain at will, without trouble or difficulty.
an3.63:5.2 | S: What three? | T: What three?
an3.63:5.3 | S: The heavenly high and luxurious bed, the divine high and luxurious bed, and the noble high and luxurious bed. | T: The celestial high and luxurious bed, the divine high and luxurious bed, and the noble high and luxurious bed.
an3.63:5.4 | S: These are the three high and luxurious beds that I get these days when I want, without trouble or difficulty.” | T: These are the three kinds of high and luxurious beds that at present I gain at will, without trouble or difficulty.”
an3.63:6.1 | S: “But what, worthy Gotama, is the heavenly high and luxurious bed?” | T: (1) “But, Master Gotama, what is the celestial high and luxurious bed that at present you gain at will, without trouble or difficulty?”
an3.63:6.2 | S: “Brahmin, when I am living supported by a village or town, I robe up in the morning and, taking my bowl and robe, enter the town or village for alms. | T: “Here, brahmin, when I am dwelling in dependence on a village or town, in the morning I dress, take my bowl and robe, and enter that village or town for alms.
an3.63:6.3 | S: After the meal, on my return from almsround, I enter within a forest. | T: After the meal, when I have returned from the alms round, I enter a grove.
an3.63:6.4 | S: I gather up some grass or leaves into a pile and sit down cross-legged, setting my body straight, and bringing mindfulness to the present. | T: I collect some grass or leaves that I find there into a pile and then sit down. Having folded my legs crosswise and straightened my body, I establish mindfulness in front of me.
an3.63:6.5 | S: Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, I enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: Then, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, I enter and dwell in the first jhāna, which consists of rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by thought and examination.
an3.63:6.6 | S: As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, I enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: With the subsiding of thought and examination, I enter and dwell in the second jhāna, which has internal placidity and unification of mind and consists of rapture and pleasure born of concentration, without thought and examination.
an3.63:6.7 | S: And with the fading away of rapture, I enter and remain in the third absorption, where I meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, experiencing for themselves the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’ | T: With the fading away as well of rapture, I dwell equanimous and, mindful and clearly comprehending, I experience pleasure with the body; I enter and dwell in the third jhāna of which the noble ones declare: ‘He is equanimous, mindful, one who dwells happily.’
an3.63:6.8 | S: With the giving up of pleasure and pain, and the disappearance of former happiness and sadness, I enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. | T: With the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous passing away of joy and dejection, I enter and dwell in the fourth jhāna, neither painful nor pleasant, which has purification of mindfulness by equanimity.
an3.63:6.9 | S: When I’m practicing like this, if I walk, at that time my walking is heavenly. | T: “Then, brahmin, when I am in such a state, if I walk back and forth, on that occasion my walking back and forth is celestial.
an3.63:6.10 | S: When I’m practicing like this, if I stand, at that time my standing is heavenly. | T: If I am standing, on that occasion my standing is celestial.
an3.63:6.11 | S: When I’m practicing like this, if I sit, at that time my sitting is heavenly. | T: If I am sitting, on that occasion my sitting is celestial.
an3.63:6.12 | S: When I’m practicing like this, if I lie down, at that time my lying is heavenly. | T: If I lie down,
an3.63:6.13 | S: This is the heavenly high and luxurious bed that I get these days when I want, without trouble or difficulty.” | T: on that occasion this is my celestial high and luxurious bed. This is that celestial high and luxurious bed that at present I can gain at will, without trouble or difficulty.”
an3.63:7.1 | S: “It’s incredible, worthy Gotama, it’s amazing! | T: “It is astounding and amazing, Master Gotama!
an3.63:7.2 | S: Who but the worthy Gotama could get such a heavenly high and luxurious bed when he wants, without trouble or difficulty? | T: Who else, apart from Master Gotama, can gain at will, without trouble or difficulty, such a celestial high and luxurious bed?
an3.63:8.1 | S: But what, worthy Gotama, is the divine high and luxurious bed?” | T: (2) “But, Master Gotama, what is the divine high and luxurious bed that at present you gain at will, without trouble or difficulty?”
an3.63:8.2 | S: “Brahmin, when I am living supported by a village or town, I robe up in the morning and, taking my bowl and robe, enter the town or village for alms. | T: “Here, brahmin, when I am dwelling in dependence on a village or town, in the morning I dress, take my bowl and robe, and enter that village or town for alms.
an3.63:8.3 | S: After the meal, on my return from almsround, I enter within a forest. | T: After the meal, when I have returned from the alms round, I enter a grove.
an3.63:8.4 | S: I gather up some grass or leaves into a pile and sit down cross-legged, setting my body straight, and bringing mindfulness to the present. | T: I collect some grass or leaves that I find there into a pile and then sit down. Having folded my legs crosswise and straightened my body, I establish mindfulness in front of me.
an3.63:8.5 | S: I meditate spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, I spread a heart full of love to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. | T: Then I dwell pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter. Thus above, below, across, and everywhere, and to all as to myself, I dwell pervading the entire world with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, vast, exalted, measureless, without enmity, without ill will.
an3.63:8.6 | S: I meditate spreading a heart full of compassion to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, I spread a heart full of compassion to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. | T: I dwell pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with compassion …
an3.63:8.7 | S: I meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, I spread a heart full of rejoicing to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. | T: with a mind imbued with altruistic joy …
an3.63:8.8 | S: I meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, I spread a heart full of equanimity to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. | T: with a mind imbued with equanimity, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter. Thus above, below, across, and everywhere, and to all as to myself, I dwell pervading the entire world with a mind imbued with equanimity, vast, exalted, measureless, without enmity, without ill will.
an3.63:8.9 | S: When I’m practicing like this, if I walk, at that time my walking is divine. | T: “Then, brahmin, when I am in such a state, if I walk back and forth, on that occasion my walking back and forth is divine.
an3.63:8.10 | S: … my standing is divine. | T: If I am standing, on that occasion my standing is divine.
an3.63:8.11 | S: … my sitting is divine. | T: If I am sitting,
an3.63:8.12 | S: When I’m practicing like this, if I lie down, at that time my lying is divine. | T: on that occasion my sitting is divine. If I lie down,
an3.63:8.13 | S: This is the divine high and luxurious bed that I get these days when I want, without trouble or difficulty.” | T: on that occasion this is my divine high and luxurious bed. This is that divine high and luxurious bed that at present I can gain at will, without trouble or difficulty.”
an3.63:9.1 | S: “It’s incredible, worthy Gotama, it’s amazing! | T: “It is astounding and amazing, Master Gotama!
an3.63:9.2 | S: Who but the worthy Gotama could get such a divine high and luxurious bed when he wants, without trouble or difficulty? | T: Who else, apart from Master Gotama, can gain at will, without trouble or difficulty, such a high and luxurious bed?
an3.63:10.1 | S: But what, worthy Gotama, is the noble high and luxurious bed?” | T: (3) “But, Master Gotama, what is the noble high and luxurious bed that at present you gain at will, without trouble or difficulty?”
an3.63:10.2 | S: “Brahmin, when I am living supported by a village or town, I robe up in the morning and, taking my bowl and robe, enter the town or village for alms. | T: “Here, brahmin, when I am dwelling in dependence on a village or town, in the morning I dress, take my bowl and robe, and enter that village or town for alms.
an3.63:10.3 | S: After the meal, on my return from almsround, I enter within a forest. | T: After the meal, when I have returned from the alms round, I enter a grove.
an3.63:10.4 | S: I gather up some grass or leaves into a pile and sit down cross-legged, setting my body straight, and bringing mindfulness to the present. | T: I collect some grass or leaves that I find there into a pile and then sit down. Having folded my legs crosswise and straightened my body, I establish mindfulness in front of me.
an3.63:10.5 | S: I know this: | T: Then I understand thus:
an3.63:10.6 | S: ‘I’ve given up greed, hate, and delusion, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so they’re unable to arise in the future.’ | T: ‘I have abandoned greed, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising. I have abandoned hatred, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising. I have abandoned delusion, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising.’
an3.63:10.9 | S: When I’m practicing like this, if I walk, at that time my walking is noble. | T: “Then, brahmin, when I am in such a state, if I walk back and forth, on that occasion my walking back and forth is noble.
an3.63:10.10 | S: … my standing is noble. | T: If I am standing, on that occasion my standing is noble.
an3.63:10.11 | S: … my sitting is noble. | T: If I am sitting,
an3.63:10.12 | S: When I’m practicing like this, if I lie down, at that time my lying is noble. | T: on that occasion my sitting is noble. If I lie down,
an3.63:10.13 | S: This is the noble high and luxurious bed that I get these days when I want, without trouble or difficulty.” | T: on that occasion this is my noble high and luxurious bed. This is that noble high and luxurious bed that at present I can gain at will, without trouble or difficulty.”
an3.63:11.1 | S: “It’s incredible, worthy Gotama, it’s amazing! | T: “It is astounding and amazing, Master Gotama!
an3.63:11.2 | S: Who but the worthy Gotama could get such a noble high and luxurious bed when he wants, without trouble or difficulty? | T: Who else, apart from Master Gotama, can gain at will, without trouble or difficulty, such a noble high and luxurious bed?
an3.63:12.1 | S: Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! | T: “Excellent, Master Gotama! Excellent, Master Gotama!
an3.63:12.2 | S: As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, worthy Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. | T: Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the darkness so those with good eyesight can see forms.
an3.63:12.3 | S: We go for refuge to the worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. | T: We now go for refuge to Master Gotama, to the Dhamma, and to the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
an3.63:12.4 | S: From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember us as lay followers who have gone for refuge for life.” | T: Let Master Gotama consider us lay followers who from today have gone for refuge for life.”

## an3.6
an3.6:1.1 | S: “A fool is known by three things. | T: “Bhikkhus, one who possesses three qualities should be known as a fool.
an3.6:1.2 | S: What three? | T: What three?
an3.6:1.3 | S: Unskillful deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: Unwholesome bodily action, unwholesome verbal action, and unwholesome mental action.
an3.6:1.4 | S: These are the three things by which a fool is known. | T: One who possesses these three qualities should be known as a fool.
an3.6:2.1 | S: An astute person is known by three things. | T: “One who possesses three qualities should be known as a wise person.
an3.6:2.2 | S: What three? | T: What three?
an3.6:2.3 | S: Skillful deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: Wholesome bodily action, wholesome verbal action, and wholesome mental action.
an3.6:2.4 | S: These are the three things by which an astute person is known. | T: One who possesses these three qualities should be known as a wise person.
an3.6:2.5 | S: So you should train …” | T: “Therefore … It is in this way that you should train yourselves.”

## an3.7
an3.7:1.1 | S: “A fool is known by three things. | T: “Bhikkhus, one who possesses three qualities should be known as a fool.
an3.7:1.2 | S: What three? | T: What three?
an3.7:1.3 | S: Blameworthy deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. … An astute person is known by blameless deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. …” | T: Blameworthy bodily action, blameworthy verbal action, and blameworthy mental action. One who possesses these three qualities should be known as a fool. “One who possesses three qualities should be known as a wise person. What three? Blameless bodily action, blameless verbal action, and blameless mental action. One who possesses these three qualities should be known as a wise person. “Therefore … It is in this way that you should train yourselves.”

## an3.8
an3.8:1.1 | S: “A fool is known by three things. | T: “Bhikkhus, one who possesses three qualities should be known as a fool.
an3.8:1.2 | S: What three? | T: What three?
an3.8:1.3 | S: Hurtful deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. … An astute person is known by kind deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: Afflictive bodily action, afflictive verbal action, and afflictive mental action. One who possesses these three qualities should be known as a fool. “One who possesses three qualities should be known as a wise person. What three? Unafflictive bodily action, unafflictive verbal action, and unafflictive mental action.
an3.8:1.4 | S: These are the three things by which an astute person is known. | T: One who possesses these three qualities should be known as a wise person.
an3.8:2.1 | S: So you should train like this: | T: “Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus:
an3.8:2.2 | S: ‘We will shun the three qualities by which a fool is known, and we will proceed having undertaken the three qualities by which an astute person is known.’ | T: ‘We will avoid the three qualities possessing which one is known as a fool, and we will undertake and observe the three qualities possessing which one is known as a wise person.’
an3.8:2.3 | S: That’s how you should train.” | T: It is in this way that you should train yourselves.”

## an3.9
an3.9:1.1 | S: “When a foolish, incompetent, untrue person has three qualities they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much wickedness. | T: “Bhikkhus, possessing three qualities, the foolish, incompetent, bad person maintains himself in a maimed and injured condition; he is blameworthy and subject to reproach by the wise; and he generates much demerit.
an3.9:1.2 | S: What three? | T: What three?
an3.9:1.3 | S: Bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: Bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, and mental misconduct.
an3.9:1.4 | S: When a foolish, incompetent untrue person possesses these three qualities they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much wickedness. | T: Possessing these three qualities, the foolish, incompetent, bad person maintains himself in a maimed and injured condition; he is blameworthy and subject to reproach by the wise; and he generates much demerit.
an3.9:2.1 | S: When an astute, competent true person has three qualities they keep themselves healthy and whole. They don’t deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much merit. | T: “Bhikkhus, possessing three qualities, the wise, competent, good person preserves himself unmaimed and uninjured; he is blameless and beyond reproach by the wise; and he generates much merit.
an3.9:2.2 | S: What three? | T: What three?
an3.9:2.3 | S: Good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: Bodily good conduct, verbal good conduct, and mental good conduct.
an3.9:2.4 | S: When an astute, competent true person possesses these three qualities they keep themselves healthy and whole. They don’t deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much merit.” | T: Possessing these three qualities, the wise, competent, good person preserves himself unmaimed and uninjured; he is blameless and beyond reproach by the wise; and he generates much merit.”

## an4.13
an4.13:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, there are these four right efforts. | T: “Bhikkhus, there are these four right strivings.
an4.13:1.2 | S: What four? | T: What four?
an4.13:1.3 | S: A mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities don’t arise. | T: (1) Here, a bhikkhu generates desire for the non-arising of unarisen bad unwholesome states; he makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives.
an4.13:1.4 | S: They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up. | T: (2) He generates desire for the abandoning of arisen bad unwholesome states; he makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives.
an4.13:1.5 | S: They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities arise. | T: (3) He generates desire for the arising of unarisen wholesome states; he makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives.
an4.13:1.6 | S: They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are fully developed. | T: (4) He generates desire for the persistence of arisen wholesome states, for their non-decline, increase, expansion, and fulfillment by development; he makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives.
an4.13:1.7 | S: These are the four right efforts. | T: These are the four right strivings.”
an4.13:2.1 | S: By rightly striving, <j>they’ve crushed Māra’s sovereignty; | T: Those who strive rightly overcome the realm of Māra;
an4.13:2.2 | S: unattached, they’ve gone beyond  <j>the peril of birth and death. | T: they are unattached, gone beyond fear of birth and death.
an4.13:2.3 | S: Contented and unstirred, they’ve vanquished Māra with his legions; | T: They are contented and unstirred, having conquered Māra and his mount;
an4.13:2.4 | S: now they’ve gone beyond all Namuci’s forces, <j>they’re happy.” | T: those happy ones have overcome all Namuci’s armies.

## an4.20
an4.20:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, a meal assigner who has four qualities is placed in hell as if delivered there. | T: “Bhikkhus, if an assigner of meals possesses four qualities, he is deposited in hell as if brought there.
an4.20:1.2 | S: What four? | T: What four?
an4.20:1.3 | S: They make decisions prejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. | T: He takes a wrong course because of desire, because of hatred, because of delusion, or because of fear.
an4.20:1.4 | S: A meal assigner who has these four qualities is placed in hell as if delivered there. | T: If an assigner of meals possesses these four qualities, he is deposited in hell as if brought there.
an4.20:2.1 | S: A meal designator who has four qualities is placed in heaven as if delivered there. | T: “Bhikkhus, if an assigner of meals possesses four qualities, he is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
an4.20:2.2 | S: What four? | T: What four?
an4.20:2.3 | S: They make decisions unprejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. | T: He does not take a wrong course because of desire, because of hatred, because of delusion, or because of fear.
an4.20:2.4 | S: A meal assigner who has these four qualities is placed in heaven as if delivered there. | T: If an assigner of meals possesses these four qualities, he is deposited in heaven as if brought there.”
an4.20:3.1 | S: All those people with unbridled sensuality, | T: Those people uncontrolled in sensual pleasures,
an4.20:3.2 | S: unprincipled, with no respect for principle, | T: who are unrighteous, not revering the Dhamma,
an4.20:3.3 | S: led astray by favoritism or hostility, <j>stupidity or cowardice, | T: gone astray through desire, hate, and fear
an4.20:3.4 | S: are called ‘an assembly of the dregs’: | T: are called a stained assembly.
an4.20:4.1 | S: that’s what was said by the ascetic who knows. | T: Such is said by the Ascetic who knows.
an4.20:4.2 | S: And so those praiseworthy true persons, | T: Therefore those good persons who are praiseworthy,
an4.20:4.3 | S: standing on principle, doing nothing wrong, | T: firm in the Dhamma, who do nothing bad,
an4.20:4.4 | S: not led astray by favoritism or hostility, <j>stupidity or cowardice, | T: unswayed by desire, hate, and fear,
an4.20:4.5 | S: are called ‘an assembly of the cream’: | T: are called an elite assembly.
an4.20:4.6 | S: that’s what was said by the ascetic who knows.” | T: Such is said by the Ascetic who knows.

