## an10.19
an10.19:1.1 | S: “There are these ten abodes of the noble ones in which the noble ones of the past, present, and future abide. | T: “Bhikkhus, there are these ten abodes of the noble ones in which the noble ones of the past, present, or future abide.
an10.19:1.2 | S: What ten? | T: What ten?
an10.19:1.3 | S: A mendicant has given up five factors, is endowed with six factors, has a single guard, has four supports, has cast aside idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth, has totally given up searching, has unsullied intentions, has stilled the physical process, and is well freed in mind and well freed by wisdom. | T: “Here, a bhikkhu (1) has abandoned five factors; (2) possesses six factors; (3) has a single guard (4) and four supports; (5) has dispelled personal truths, (6) totally renounced seeking, (7) purified his intentions, (8) tranquilized bodily activity, and become (9) well liberated in mind and (10) well liberated by wisdom.
an10.19:1.4 | S: These are the ten abodes of the noble ones in which the noble ones of the past, present, and future abide.” | T: These are the ten abodes of the noble ones in which the noble ones of the past, present, or future abide.”

## an10.1
an10.1:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
an10.1:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
an10.1:1.3 | S: Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: | T: Then the Venerable Ānanda approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and said to him:
an10.1:2.1 | S: “Sir, what is the goal and benefit of skillful ethics?” | T: (1) “Bhante, what is the purpose and benefit of wholesome virtuous behavior?”
an10.1:2.2 | S: “Ānanda, having no regrets is the goal and benefit of skillful ethics.” | T: (2) “Ānanda, the purpose and benefit of wholesome virtuous behavior is non-regret.”
an10.1:3.1 | S: “But what is the goal and benefit of having no regrets?” | T: (3) “And what, Bhante, is the purpose and benefit of non-regret?”
an10.1:3.2 | S: “Joy is the goal and benefit of having no regrets.” | T: “The purpose and benefit of non-regret is joy.”
an10.1:4.1 | S: “But what is the goal and benefit of joy?” | T: (4) “And what, Bhante, is the purpose and benefit of joy?”
an10.1:4.2 | S: “Rapture …” | T: “The purpose and benefit of joy is rapture.”
an10.1:5.1 | S: “But what is the goal and benefit of rapture?” | T: (5) “And what, Bhante, is the purpose and benefit of rapture?”
an10.1:5.2 | S: “Tranquility …” | T: “The purpose and benefit of rapture is tranquility.”
an10.1:6.1 | S: “But what is the goal and benefit of tranquility?” | T: (6) “And what, Bhante, is the purpose and benefit of tranquility?” “The purpose and benefit of tranquility is pleasure.”
an10.1:6.2 | S: “Bliss …” | T: (7)
an10.1:7.1 | S: “But what is the goal and benefit of bliss?” | T: “And what, Bhante, is the purpose and benefit of pleasure?”
an10.1:7.2 | S: “Immersion …” | T: “The purpose and benefit of pleasure is concentration.”
an10.1:8.1 | S: “But what is the goal and benefit of immersion?” | T: (8) “And what, Bhante, is the purpose and benefit of concentration?”
an10.1:8.2 | S: “Truly knowing and seeing …” | T: “The purpose and benefit of concentration is the knowledge and vision of things as they really are.”
an10.1:9.1 | S: “But what is the goal and benefit of truly knowing and seeing?” | T: (9) “And what, Bhante, is the purpose and benefit of the knowledge and vision of things as they really are?”
an10.1:9.2 | S: “Disillusionment and dispassion …” | T: “The purpose and benefit of the knowledge and vision of things as they really are is disenchantment and dispassion.”
an10.1:10.1 | S: “But what is the goal and benefit of disillusionment and dispassion?” | T: (10) “And what, Bhante, is the purpose and benefit of disenchantment and dispassion?”
an10.1:10.2 | S: “Knowledge and vision of freedom is the goal and benefit of disillusionment and dispassion. | T: “The purpose and benefit of disenchantment and dispassion is the knowledge and vision of liberation.
an10.1:11.1 | S: So, Ānanda, the goal and benefit of skillful ethics is not having regrets. | T: “Thus, Ānanda, (1)–(2) the purpose and benefit of wholesome virtuous behavior is non-regret;
an10.1:11.2 | S: Joy is the goal and benefit of not having regrets. | T: (3) the purpose and benefit of non-regret is joy;
an10.1:11.3 | S: Rapture is the goal and benefit of joy. | T: (4) the purpose and benefit of joy is rapture;
an10.1:11.4 | S: Tranquility is the goal and benefit of rapture. | T: (5) the purpose and benefit of rapture is tranquility;
an10.1:11.5 | S: Bliss is the goal and benefit of tranquility. | T: (6) the purpose and benefit of tranquility is pleasure;
an10.1:11.6 | S: Immersion is the goal and benefit of bliss. | T: (7) the purpose and benefit of pleasure is concentration;
an10.1:11.7 | S: Truly knowing and seeing is the goal and benefit of immersion. | T: (8) the purpose and benefit of concentration is the knowledge and vision of things as they really are;
an10.1:11.8 | S: Disillusionment and dispassion is the goal and benefit of truly knowing and seeing. | T: (9) the purpose and benefit of the knowledge and vision of things as they really are is disenchantment and dispassion;
an10.1:11.9 | S: Knowledge and vision of freedom is the goal and benefit of disillusionment and dispassion. | T: and (10) the purpose and benefit of disenchantment and dispassion is the knowledge and vision of liberation.
an10.1:11.10 | S: So, Ānanda, skillful ethics progressively lead up to the highest.” | T: Thus, Ānanda, wholesome virtuous behavior progressively leads to the foremost.”

## an10.20
an10.20:1.1 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Kurus, near the Kuru town named Kammāsadamma. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Kurus near the Kuru town named Kammāsadamma.
an10.20:1.2 | S: There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: | T: There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus…. The Blessed One said this:
an10.20:2.1 | S: “There are these ten abodes of the noble ones in which the noble ones of the past, present, and future abide. | T: “Bhikkhus, there are these ten abodes of the noble ones in which the noble ones abide in the past, present, or future.
an10.20:2.2 | S: What ten? | T: What ten?
an10.20:2.3 | S: A mendicant has given up five factors, possesses six factors, has a single guard, has four supports, has cast aside idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth, has totally given up searching, has unsullied intentions, has stilled the physical process, and is well freed in mind and well freed by wisdom. | T: “Here, a bhikkhu (1) has abandoned five factors; (2) possesses six factors; (3) has a single guard (4) and four supports; (5) has dispelled personal truths, (6) totally renounced seeking, (7) purified his intentions, (8) tranquilized bodily activity, and become (9) well liberated in mind and (10) well liberated by wisdom.
an10.20:3.1 | S: And how has a mendicant given up five factors? | T: (1) “And how has a bhikkhu abandoned five factors?
an10.20:3.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant has given up sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. | T: Here, a bhikkhu has abandoned sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt.
an10.20:3.3 | S: That’s how a mendicant has given up five factors. | T: It is in this way that a bhikkhu has abandoned five factors.
an10.20:4.1 | S: And how does a mendicant possess six factors? | T: (2) “And how does a bhikkhu possess six factors?
an10.20:4.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant, seeing a sight with their eyes, is neither happy nor sad. They remain equanimous, mindful and aware. | T: Here, having seen a form with the eye, a bhikkhu is neither joyful nor saddened, but dwells equanimous, mindful and clearly comprehending.
an10.20:4.3 | S: Hearing a sound with their ears … | T: Having heard a sound with the ear …
an10.20:4.4 | S: Smelling an odor with their nose … | T: Having smelled an odor with the nose …
an10.20:4.5 | S: Tasting a flavor with their tongue … | T: Having experienced a taste with the tongue …
an10.20:4.6 | S: Encountering a touch with their body … | T: Having felt a tactile object with the body …
an10.20:4.7 | S: Knowing an idea with their mind, they’re neither happy nor sad. They remain equanimous, mindful and aware. | T: Having cognized a mental phenomenon with the mind, a bhikkhu is neither joyful nor saddened, but dwells equanimous, mindful and clearly comprehending.
an10.20:4.8 | S: That’s how a mendicant possesses six factors. | T: It is in this way that a bhikkhu possesses six factors.
an10.20:5.1 | S: And how does a mendicant have a single guard? | T: (3) “And how does a bhikkhu have a single guard?
an10.20:5.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant’s heart is guarded by mindfulness. | T: Here, a bhikkhu possesses a mind guarded by mindfulness.
an10.20:5.3 | S: That’s how a mendicant has a single guard. | T: It is in this way that a bhikkhu has a single guard.
an10.20:6.1 | S: And how does a mendicant have four supports? | T: (4) “And how does a bhikkhu have four supports?
an10.20:6.2 | S: After appraisal, a mendicant uses some things, endures some things, avoids some things, and dispels some things. | T: Here, having reflected, a bhikkhu uses some things, patiently endures other things, avoids still other things, and dispels still other things.
an10.20:6.3 | S: That’s how a mendicant has four supports. | T: It is in this way that a bhikkhu has four supports.
an10.20:7.1 | S: And how has a mendicant cast aside idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth? | T: (5) “And how has a bhikkhu dispelled personal truths?
an10.20:7.2 | S: Different ascetics and brahmins have different idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth. For example: | T: Here, whatever ordinary personal truths may be held by ordinary ascetics and brahmins—that is,
an10.20:7.3 | S: the cosmos is eternal, or not eternal, or finite, or infinite; the soul and the body are one and the same, or the soul is one thing, the body another; after death, a realized one still exists, or no longer exists, or both still exists and no longer exists, or neither still exists nor no longer exists. | T: ‘The world is eternal’ or ‘The world is not eternal’; ‘The world is finite’ or ‘The world is infinite’; ‘The soul and the body are the same’ or ‘The soul is one thing and the body another’; ‘The Tathāgata exists after death’ or ‘The Tathāgata does not exist after death’ or ‘The Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death’ or ‘The Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death’—
an10.20:7.4 | S: A mendicant has cast out, cast aside, thrown out, discarded, let go of, given up, and relinquished all these. | T: a bhikkhu has discarded and dispelled them all, given them up, rejected them, let go of them, abandoned and relinquished them.
an10.20:7.5 | S: That’s how a mendicant has cast aside idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth. | T: It is in this way that a bhikkhu has dispelled personal truths.
an10.20:8.1 | S: And how has a mendicant totally given up searching? | T: (6) “And how has a bhikkhu totally renounced seeking?
an10.20:8.2 | S: It’s when they’ve given up searching for sensual pleasures, for continued existence, and for a spiritual life. | T: Here, a bhikkhu has abandoned the search for sensual pleasures and the search for existence and has allayed the search for a spiritual life.
an10.20:8.3 | S: That’s how a mendicant has totally given up searching. | T: It is in this way that a bhikkhu has totally renounced seeking.
an10.20:9.1 | S: And how does a mendicant have unsullied intentions? | T: (7) “And how has a bhikkhu purified his intentions?
an10.20:9.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant has given up intentions of sensuality, malice, and cruelty. | T: Here, a bhikkhu has abandoned sensual intention, intention of ill will, and intention of harming.
an10.20:9.3 | S: That’s how a mendicant has unsullied intentions. | T: It is in this way that a bhikkhu has purified his intentions.
an10.20:10.1 | S: And how has a mendicant stilled the physical process? | T: (8) “And how has a bhikkhu tranquilized bodily activity?
an10.20:10.2 | S: It’s when, with the giving up of pleasure and pain and the disappearance of former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. | T: Here, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous passing away of joy and dejection, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the fourth jhāna, neither painful nor pleasant, which has purification of mindfulness by equanimity.
an10.20:10.3 | S: That’s how a mendicant has stilled the physical process. | T: It is in this way that a bhikkhu has tranquilized bodily activity.
an10.20:11.1 | S: And how is a mendicant well freed in mind? | T: (9) “And how is a bhikkhu well liberated in mind?
an10.20:11.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant’s mind is freed from greed, hate, and delusion. | T: Here, a bhikkhu’s mind is liberated from lust, hatred, and delusion.
an10.20:11.3 | S: That’s how a mendicant is well freed in mind. | T: It is in this way that a bhikkhu is well liberated in mind.
an10.20:12.1 | S: And how is a mendicant well freed by wisdom? | T: (10) “And how is a bhikkhu well liberated by wisdom?
an10.20:12.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant understands: ‘I’ve given up greed, hate, and delusion, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so they’re unable to arise in the future.’ | T: Here, a bhikkhu understands: ‘I have abandoned lust, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising; I have abandoned hatred … abandoned delusion, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising.’
an10.20:12.3 | S: That’s how a mendicant’s mind is well freed by wisdom. | T: It is in this way that a bhikkhu is well liberated by wisdom.
an10.20:13.1 | S: Mendicants, whether in the past, future, or present, all noble ones abide in these same ten abodes of the noble ones. | T: “Bhikkhus, whatever noble ones in the past abided in noble abodes, all abided in these same ten noble abodes. Whatever noble ones in the future will abide in noble abodes, all will abide in these same ten noble abodes. Whatever noble ones at present abide in noble abodes, all abide in these same ten noble abodes.
an10.20:13.4 | S: These are the ten abodes of the noble ones in which the noble ones of the past, present, and future abide.” | T: “These are the ten abodes of the noble ones in which the noble ones abide in the past, present, or future.”

## an10.211
an10.211:1.1 | S: “Someone with ten qualities is placed in hell as if delivered there. | T: “Bhikkhus, possessing ten qualities, one is deposited in hell as if brought there.
an10.211:1.2 | S: What ten? | T: What ten?
an10.211:1.3 | S: It’s when someone kills living creatures. They’re violent, bloody-handed, a hardened killer, merciless to all living beings. | T: (1) “Here, someone destroys life; he is murderous, bloody-handed, given to blows and violence, merciless to living beings.
an10.211:2.1 | S: They steal. With the intention to commit theft, they take the wealth or belongings of others from village or wilderness. | T: (2) “He takes what is not given; he steals the wealth and property of others in the village or forest.
an10.211:3.1 | S: They commit sexual misconduct. They have relations with women who have their mother, father, both mother and father, brother, sister, relatives, or clan as guardian. They have relations with a woman who is protected on principle, or who has a husband, or whose violation is punishable by law, or even one who has been garlanded as a token of betrothal. | T: (3)“He engages in sexual misconduct; he has sexual relations with women who are protected by their mother, father, mother and father, brother, sister, or relatives; who are protected by their Dhamma; who have a husband; whose violation entails a penalty; or even with one already engaged.
an10.211:4.1 | S: They lie. They’re summoned to a council, an assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to bear witness: ‘Please, my man, say what you know.’ Not knowing, they say ‘I know.’ Knowing, they say ‘I don’t know.’ Not seeing, they say ‘I see.’ And seeing, they say ‘I don’t see.’ So they deliberately lie for the sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly reason. | T: (4) “He speaks falsehood. If he is summoned to a council, to an assembly, to his relatives’ presence, to his guild, or to the court, and questioned as a witness thus: ‘So, good man, tell what you know,’ then, not knowing, he says, ‘I know,’ or knowing, he says, ‘I do not know’; not seeing, he says, ‘I see,’ or seeing, he says, ‘I do not see.’ Thus he consciously speaks falsehood for his own ends, or for another’s ends, or for some trifling worldly end.
an10.211:5.1 | S: They backbite. They repeat in one place what they heard in another so as to divide people against each other. And so they divide those who are harmonious, supporting division, delighting in division, loving division, speaking words that promote division. | T: (5) “He speaks divisively. Having heard something here, he repeats it elsewhere in order to divide those people from these; or having heard something elsewhere, he repeats it to these people in order to divide them from those. Thus he is one who divides those who are united, a creator of divisions, one who enjoys factions, rejoices in factions, delights in factions, a speaker of words that create factions.
an10.211:6.1 | S: They speak harshly. They use the kinds of words that are cruel, nasty, hurtful, offensive, bordering on anger, not leading to immersion. | T: (6) “He speaks harshly. He utters such words as are rough, hard, hurtful to others, offensive to others, bordering on anger, unconducive to concentration.
an10.211:7.1 | S: They talk nonsense. Their speech is untimely, and is neither factual nor beneficial. It has nothing to do with the teaching or the training. Their words have no value, and are untimely, unreasonable, rambling, and pointless. | T: (7) “He indulges in idle chatter. He speaks at an improper time, speaks falsely, speaks what is unbeneficial, speaks contrary to the Dhamma and the discipline; at an improper time he speaks such words as are worthless, unreasonable, rambling, and unbeneficial.
an10.211:8.1 | S: They’re covetous. They covet the wealth and belongings of others: ‘Oh, if only their belongings were mine!’ | T: (8)“He is full of longing. He longs for the wealth and property of others thus: ‘Oh, may what belongs to another be mine!’
an10.211:9.1 | S: They have ill will and malicious intentions: ‘May these sentient beings be killed, slaughtered, slain, destroyed, or annihilated!’ | T: (9) “He has a mind of ill will and intentions of hate thus: ‘May these beings be slain, slaughtered, cut off, destroyed, or annihilated!’
an10.211:10.1 | S: They have wrong view. Their perspective is distorted: | T: (10) “He holds wrong view and has an incorrect perspective thus:
an10.211:11.1 | S: ‘There’s no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There’s no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There’s no afterlife. There’s no such thing as mother and father, or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there’s no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ | T: ‘There is nothing given, nothing sacrificed, nothing offered; there is no fruit or result of good and bad actions; there is no this world, no other world; there is no mother, no father; there are no beings spontaneously reborn; there are in the world no ascetics and brahmins of right conduct and right practice who, having realized this world and the other world for themselves by direct knowledge, make them known to others.’
an10.211:11.2 | S: Someone with these ten qualities is placed in hell as if delivered there. | T: “One possessing these ten qualities is deposited in hell as if brought there.
an10.211:12.1 | S: Someone with ten qualities is placed in heaven as if delivered there. | T: “Bhikkhus, one possessing ten qualities is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
an10.211:12.2 | S: What ten? | T: What ten?
an10.211:12.3 | S: It’s when someone gives up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. They’re scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for all living beings. | T: (1)“Here, someone, having abandoned the destruction of life, abstains from the destruction of life. With the rod and weapon laid aside, conscientious and kindly, he dwells compassionate toward all living beings.
an10.211:13.1 | S: They give up stealing. They don’t, with the intention to commit theft, take the wealth or belongings of others from village or wilderness. | T: (2) “Having abandoned the taking of what is not given, he abstains from taking what is not given. He does not steal the wealth and property of others in the village or in the forest.
an10.211:14.1 | S: They give up sexual misconduct. They don’t have relations with women who have their mother, father, both mother and father, brother, sister, relatives, or clan as guardian. They don’t have relations with a woman who is protected on principle, or who has a husband, or whose violation is punishable by law, or even one who has been garlanded as a token of betrothal. | T: (3) “Having abandoned sexual misconduct, he abstains from sexual misconduct. He does not have sexual relations with women who are protected by their mother, father, mother and father, brother, sister, or relatives; who are protected by their Dhamma; who have a husband; whose violation entails a penalty; or even with one already engaged.
an10.211:15.1 | S: They give up lying. They’re summoned to a council, an assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to bear witness: ‘Please, my man, say what you know.’ Not knowing, they say ‘I don’t know.’ Knowing, they say ‘I know.’ Not seeing, they say ‘I don’t see.’ And seeing, they say ‘I see.’ So they don’t deliberately lie for the sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly reason. | T: (4) “Having abandoned false speech, he abstains from false speech. If he is summoned to a council, to an assembly, to his relatives’ presence, to his guild, or to the court, and questioned as a witness thus: ‘So, good man, tell what you know,’ then, not knowing, he says, ‘I do not know,’ or knowing, he says, ‘I know’; not seeing, he says, ‘I do not see,’ or seeing, he says, ‘I see.’ Thus he does not consciously speak falsehood for his own ends, or for another’s ends, or for some trifling worldly end.
an10.211:16.1 | S: They give up backbiting. They don’t repeat in one place what they heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead, they reconcile those who are divided and support those who are united, delighting in harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony. | T: (5) “Having abandoned divisive speech, he abstains from divisive speech. Having heard something here, he does not repeat it elsewhere in order to divide those people from these; or having heard something elsewhere, he does not repeat it to these people in order to divide them from those. Thus he is one who reunites those who are divided, a promoter of unity, who enjoys concord, rejoices in concord, delights in concord, a speaker of words that promote concord.
an10.211:17.1 | S: They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way that’s mellow, pleasing to the ear, endearing, going to the heart, polite, and likable and agreeable to the people. | T: (6) “Having abandoned harsh speech, he abstains from harsh speech. He speaks such words as are gentle, pleasing to the ear, and lovable, as go to the heart, are courteous, desired by many, and agreeable to many.
an10.211:18.1 | S: They give up talking nonsense. Their words are timely, true, and meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. They say things at the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial. | T: (7) “Having abandoned idle chatter, he abstains from idle chatter. He speaks at a proper time, speaks truth, speaks what is beneficial, speaks on the Dhamma and the discipline; at a proper time he speaks such words as are worth recording, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial.
an10.211:19.1 | S: They’re content. They don’t covet the wealth and belongings of others: ‘Oh, if only their belongings were mine!’ | T: (8) “He is without longing. He does not long for the wealth and property of others thus: ‘Oh, may what belongs to another be mine!’
an10.211:20.1 | S: They have a kind heart and loving intentions: ‘May these sentient beings live free of enmity and ill will, untroubled and happy!’ | T: (9) “He is of good will and his intentions are free of hate thus: ‘May these beings live happily, free from enmity, affliction, and anxiety!’
an10.211:21.1 | S: They have right view, an undistorted perspective: | T: (10) “He holds right view and has a correct perspective thus:
an10.211:21.2 | S: ‘There is meaning in giving, sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother and father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ | T: ‘There is what is given, sacrificed, and offered; there is fruit and result of good and bad actions; there is this world and the other world; there is mother and father; there are beings spontaneously reborn; there are in the world ascetics and brahmins of right conduct and right practice who, having realized this world and the other world for themselves by direct knowledge, make them known to others.’
an10.211:22.1 | S: Someone with these ten qualities is placed in heaven as if delivered there.” | T: “One possessing these ten qualities is deposited in heaven as if brought there.”

## an10.214
an10.214:1.1 | S: “A laywoman with ten qualities is placed in hell as if delivered there. | T: “Bhikkhus, possessing ten qualities, a female lay follower is deposited in hell as if brought there.
an10.214:1.2 | S: What ten? | T: What ten?
an10.214:1.3 | S: She kills living creatures. … | T: (1) She destroys life …
an10.214:1.4 | S: She has wrong view. … | T: and (10) holds wrong view.
an10.214:1.5 | S: A laywoman with these ten qualities is placed in hell as if delivered there. | T: Possessing these ten qualities, a female lay follower is deposited in hell as if brought there.
an10.214:2.1 | S: A laywoman with ten qualities is placed in heaven as if delivered there. | T: “Bhikkhus, possessing ten qualities, a female lay follower is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
an10.214:2.2 | S: What ten? | T: What ten?
an10.214:2.3 | S: She doesn’t kill living creatures. … | T: (1) She abstains from the destruction of life …
an10.214:2.4 | S: She has right view. … | T: and (10) holds right view.
an10.214:2.5 | S: A laywoman with these ten qualities is placed in heaven as if delivered there.” | T: Possessing these ten qualities, a female lay follower is deposited in heaven as if brought there.”

## an10.215
an10.215:1.1 | S: “A laywoman living at home with these ten qualities is not self-assured. | T: “Bhikkhus, possessing ten qualities, a female lay follower dwells without self-confidence at home.
an10.215:1.2 | S: What ten? | T: What ten?
an10.215:1.3 | S: She kills living creatures. … | T: (1) She destroys life …
an10.215:1.12 | S: She has wrong view. … | T: and (10) holds wrong view.
an10.215:1.13 | S: A laywoman living at home with these ten qualities is not self-assured. | T: Possessing these ten qualities, a female lay follower dwells without self-confidence at home.
an10.215:2.1 | S: A laywoman living at home with these ten qualities is self-assured. | T: “Bhikkhus, possessing ten qualities, a female lay follower dwells self-confident at home.
an10.215:2.2 | S: What ten? | T: What ten?
an10.215:2.3 | S: She doesn’t kill living creatures. … | T: (1) She abstains from the destruction of life …
an10.215:2.12 | S: She has right view. … | T: and (10) holds right view.
an10.215:2.13 | S: A laywoman living at home with these ten qualities is self-assured.” | T: Possessing these ten qualities, a female lay follower dwells self-confident at home.”

## an10.217
an10.217:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, I don’t say that intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated are eliminated without being experienced. | T: “Bhikkhus, I do not say that there is a termination of volitional kamma that has been done and accumulated so long as one has not experienced its results,
an10.217:1.2 | S: And that may be in this very life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. | T: and that may be in this very life, or in the next rebirth, or on some subsequent occasion.
an10.217:1.3 | S: But in any case, there is no making an end of suffering without experiencing intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated, I say. | T: But I do not say that there is making an end of suffering so long as one has not experienced the results of volitional kamma that has been done and accumulated.
an10.217:2.1 | S: Now, there are three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and result. | T: “As to this, bhikkhus, there is a threefold corruption and failure of bodily kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, having a painful outcome and result;
an10.217:2.2 | S: There are four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and result. | T: a fourfold corruption and failure of verbal kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, having a painful outcome and result;
an10.217:2.3 | S: There are three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and result. | T: and a threefold corruption and failure of mental kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, having a painful outcome and result.
an10.217:3.1 | S: And what are the three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action? | T: “And how, bhikkhus, is there a threefold corruption and failure of bodily kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, having a painful outcome and result?
an10.217:3.2 | S: It’s when someone kills living creatures. They’re violent, bloody-handed, a hardened killer, merciless to all living beings. | T: (1) “Here, someone destroys life. He is murderous, bloody-handed, given to blows and violence, merciless to living beings.
an10.217:4.1 | S: They steal. With the intention to commit theft, they take the wealth or belongings of others from village or wilderness. | T: (2) “He takes what is not given. He steals the wealth and property of others in the village or forest.
an10.217:5.1 | S: They commit sexual misconduct. They have relations with women who have their mother, father, both mother and father, brother, sister, relatives, or clan as guardian. They have relations with a woman who is protected on principle, or who has a husband, or whose violation is punishable by law, or even one who has been garlanded as a token of betrothal. | T: (3) “He engages in sexual misconduct. He has sexual relations with women who are protected by their mother, father, mother and father, brother, sister, or relatives; who are protected by their Dhamma; who have a husband; whose violation entails a penalty; or even with one already engaged.
an10.217:6.1 | S: These are the three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action. | T: “It is in this way that there is a threefold corruption and failure of bodily kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, having a painful outcome and result.
an10.217:7.1 | S: And what are the four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action? | T: “And how, bhikkhus, is there a fourfold corruption and failure of verbal kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, having a painful outcome and result?
an10.217:7.2 | S: It’s when someone lies. They’re summoned to a council, an assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to bear witness: | T: (4) “Here, someone speaks falsehood. If he is summoned to a council, to an assembly, to his relatives’ presence, to his guild, or to the court, and questioned as a witness thus:
an10.217:7.3 | S: ‘Please, my man, say what you know.’ Not knowing, they say ‘I know.’ Knowing, they say ‘I don’t know.’ Not seeing, they say ‘I see.’ And seeing, they say ‘I don’t see.’ So they deliberately lie for the sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly reason. | T: ‘So, good man, tell what you know,’ then, not knowing, he says, ‘I know,’ or knowing, he says, ‘I do not know’; not seeing, he says, ‘I see,’ or seeing, he says, ‘I do not see.’ Thus he consciously speaks falsehood for his own ends, or for another’s ends, or for some trifling worldly end.
an10.217:8.1 | S: They backbite. They repeat in one place what they heard in another so as to divide people against each other. And so they divide those who are harmonious, supporting division, delighting in division, loving division, speaking words that promote division. | T: (5) “He speaks divisively. Having heard something here, he repeats it elsewhere in order to divide those people from these; or having heard something elsewhere, he repeats it to these people in order to divide them from those. Thus he is one who divides those who are united, a creator of divisions, one who enjoys factions, rejoices in factions, delights in factions, a speaker of words that create factions.
an10.217:9.1 | S: They speak harshly. They use the kinds of words that are cruel, nasty, hurtful, offensive, bordering on anger, not leading to immersion. | T: (6) “He speaks harshly. He utters such words as are rough, hard, hurtful to others, offensive to others, bordering on anger, unconducive to concentration.
an10.217:10.1 | S: They talk nonsense. Their speech is untimely, and is neither factual nor beneficial. It has nothing to do with the teaching or the training. Their words have no value, and are untimely, unreasonable, rambling, and pointless. | T: (7) “He indulges in idle chatter. He speaks at an improper time, speaks falsely, speaks what is unbeneficial, speaks contrary to the Dhamma and the discipline; at an improper time he speaks such words as are worthless, unreasonable, rambling, and unbeneficial.
an10.217:11.1 | S: These are the four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action. | T: “It is in this way that there is a fourfold corruption and failure of verbal kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, having a painful outcome and result.
an10.217:12.1 | S: And what are the three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action? | T: “And how, bhikkhus, is there a threefold corruption and failure of mental kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, having a painful outcome and result?
an10.217:12.2 | S: It’s when someone is covetous. They covet the wealth and belongings of others: ‘Oh, if only their belongings were mine!’ | T: (8) “Here, someone is full of longing. He longs for the wealth and property of others thus: ‘Oh, may what belongs to another be mine!’
an10.217:13.1 | S: They have ill will and malicious intentions: ‘May these sentient beings be killed, slaughtered, slain, destroyed, or annihilated!’ | T: (9) “He has a mind of ill will and intentions of hate thus: ‘May these beings be slain, slaughtered, cut off, destroyed, or annihilated!’
an10.217:14.1 | S: They have wrong view. Their perspective is distorted: | T: (10) “He holds wrong view and has an incorrect perspective thus:
an10.217:14.2 | S: ‘There’s no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There’s no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There’s no afterlife. There’s no such thing as mother and father, or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there’s no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ | T: ‘There is nothing given, nothing sacrificed, nothing offered; there is no fruit or result of good and bad actions; there is no this world, no other world; there is no mother, no father; there are no beings spontaneously reborn; there are in the world no ascetics and brahmins of right conduct and right practice who, having realized this world and the other world for themselves by direct knowledge, make them known to others.’
an10.217:15.1 | S: These are the three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action. | T: “It is in this way that there is a threefold corruption and failure of mental kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, having a painful outcome and result.
an10.217:16.1 | S: When their body breaks up, after death, sentient beings are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell because of these three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action, these four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action, or these three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and result. | T: “It is, bhikkhus, because of the threefold corruption and failure of bodily kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, that with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell; or it is because of the fourfold corruption and failure of verbal kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, that with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell; or it is because of the threefold corruption and failure of mental kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, that with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
an10.217:17.1 | S: It’s like throwing sure-bet dice: they always fall the right side up. | T: Just as dice, when thrown upward, will rest firmly wherever they fall,
an10.217:17.2 | S: In the same way, when their body breaks up, after death, sentient beings are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell because of these three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action, these four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action, or these three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and result. | T: so too, it is because of the threefold corruption and failure of bodily kamma … or it is because of the fourfold corruption and failure of verbal kamma … or it is because of the threefold corruption and failure of mental kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, that with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
an10.217:18.1 | S: I don’t say that intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated are eliminated without being experienced. | T: “Bhikkhus, I do not say that there is a termination of volitional kamma that has been done and accumulated so long as one has not experienced its results,
an10.217:18.2 | S: And that may be in this very life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. | T: and that may be in this very life, or in the next rebirth, or on some subsequent occasion.
an10.217:18.3 | S: But in any case, there is no making an end of suffering without experiencing intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated, I say. | T: But I do not say that there is making an end of suffering so long as one has not experienced the results of volitional kamma that has been done and accumulated.
an10.217:19.1 | S: Now, there are three kinds of successful bodily action that have skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result. | T: “As to this, bhikkhus, there is a threefold success of bodily kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, having a pleasant outcome and result;
an10.217:19.2 | S: There are four kinds of successful verbal action that have skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result. | T: a fourfold success of verbal kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, having a pleasant outcome and result;
an10.217:19.3 | S: There are three kinds of successful mental action that have skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result. | T: and a threefold success of mental kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, having a pleasant outcome and result.
an10.217:20.1 | S: And what are the three kinds of successful bodily action? | T: “And how, bhikkhus, is there a threefold success of bodily kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, having a pleasant outcome and result?
an10.217:20.2 | S: It’s when someone gives up killing living creatures. They renounce the rod and the sword. They’re scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for all living beings. | T: (1)“Here, someone, having abandoned the destruction of life, abstains from the destruction of life. With the rod and weapon laid aside, conscientious and kindly, he dwells compassionate toward all living beings.
an10.217:21.1 | S: They don’t steal. They don’t, with the intention to commit theft, take the wealth or belongings of others from village or wilderness. | T: (2) “Having abandoned the taking of what is not given, he abstains from taking what is not given. He does not steal the wealth and property of others in the village or in the forest.
an10.217:22.1 | S: They give up sexual misconduct. They don’t have relations with women who have their mother, father, both mother and father, brother, sister, relatives, or clan as guardian. They don’t have relations with a woman who is protected on principle, or who has a husband, or whose violation is punishable by law, or even one who has been garlanded as a token of betrothal. | T: (3) “Having abandoned sexual misconduct, he abstains from sexual misconduct. He does not have sexual relations with women who are protected by their mother, father, mother and father, brother, sister, or relatives; who are protected by their Dhamma; who have a husband; whose violation entails a penalty; or even with one already engaged.
an10.217:23.1 | S: These are the three kinds of successful bodily action. | T: “It is in this way that there is a threefold success of bodily kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, having a pleasant outcome and result.
an10.217:24.1 | S: And what are the four kinds of successful verbal action? | T: “And how, bhikkhus, is there a fourfold success of verbal kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, having a pleasant outcome and result?
an10.217:24.2 | S: It’s when someone gives up lying. They’re summoned to a council, an assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to bear witness: ‘Please, my friend, say what you know.’ Not knowing, they say ‘I don’t know.’ Knowing, they say ‘I know.’ Not seeing, they say ‘I don’t see.’ And seeing, they say ‘I see.’ So they don’t deliberately lie for the sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly reason. | T: (4) “Here, having abandoned false speech, someone abstains from false speech. If he is summoned to a council, to an assembly, to his relatives’ presence, to his guild, or to the court, and questioned as a witness thus: ‘So, good man, tell what you know,’ then, not knowing, he says, ‘I do not know,’ or knowing, he says, ‘I know’; not seeing, he says, ‘I do not see,’ or seeing, he says, ‘I see.’ Thus he does not consciously speak falsehood for his own ends, or for another’s ends, or for some trifling worldly end.
an10.217:25.1 | S: They give up backbiting. They don’t repeat in one place what they heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead, they reconcile those who are divided and support those who are united, delighting in harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony. | T: (5) “Having abandoned divisive speech, he abstains from divisive speech. Having heard something here, he does not repeat it elsewhere in order to divide those people from these; or having heard something elsewhere, he does not repeat it to these people in order to divide them from those. Thus he is one who reunites those who are divided, a promoter of unity, who enjoys concord, rejoices in concord, delights in concord, a speaker of words that promote concord.
an10.217:26.1 | S: They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way that’s mellow, pleasing to the ear, endearing, going to the heart, polite, and likable and agreeable to the people. | T: (6) “Having abandoned harsh speech, he abstains from harsh speech. He speaks such words as are gentle, pleasing to the ear, and lovable, as go to the heart, are courteous, desired by many, and agreeable to many.
an10.217:27.1 | S: They give up talking nonsense. Their words are timely, true, and meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. They say things at the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial. | T: (7) “Having abandoned idle chatter, he abstains from idle chatter. He speaks at a proper time, speaks truth, speaks what is beneficial, speaks on the Dhamma and the discipline; at a proper time he speaks such words as are worth recording, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial.
an10.217:28.1 | S: These are the four kinds of successful verbal action. | T: “It is in this way that there is a fourfold success of verbal kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, having a pleasant outcome and result.
an10.217:29.1 | S: And what are the three kinds of successful mental action? | T: “And how, bhikkhus, is there a threefold success of mental kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, having a pleasant outcome and result?
an10.217:29.2 | S: It’s when someone is content. They don’t covet the wealth and belongings of others: ‘Oh, if only their belongings were mine!’ | T: (8) “Here, someone is without longing. He does not long for the wealth and property of others thus: ‘Oh, may what belongs to another be mine!’
an10.217:30.1 | S: They have a kind heart and loving intentions: ‘May these sentient beings live free of enmity and ill will, untroubled and happy!’ | T: (9) “He is of good will and his intentions are free of hate thus: ‘May these beings live happily, free from enmity, affliction, and anxiety!’
an10.217:31.1 | S: They have right view, an undistorted perspective: | T: (10) “He holds right view and has a correct perspective thus:
an10.217:31.2 | S: ‘There is meaning in giving, sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother and father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ | T: ‘There is what is given, sacrificed, and offered; there is fruit and result of good and bad actions; there is this world and the other world; there is mother and father; there are beings spontaneously reborn; there are in the world ascetics and brahmins of right conduct and right practice who, having realized this world and the other world for themselves by direct knowledge, make them known to others.’
an10.217:32.1 | S: These are the three kinds of successful mental action. | T: “It is in this way that there is a threefold success of mental kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, having a pleasant outcome and result.
an10.217:33.1 | S: When their body breaks up, after death, sentient beings are reborn in a good place, in heaven because of these three kinds of successful bodily action, these four kinds of successful verbal action, or these three kinds of successful mental action that have skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result. | T: “It is, bhikkhus, because of the threefold success of bodily kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, that with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world; or it is because of the fourfold success of verbal kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, that with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world; or it is because of the threefold success of mental kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, that with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.
an10.217:34.1 | S: It’s like throwing unfaling dice: they always fall the right side up. | T: Just as dice, when thrown upward, will rest firmly wherever they fall,
an10.217:34.2 | S: In the same way, when their body breaks up, after death, sentient beings are reborn in a good place, in heaven because of these three kinds of successful bodily action, these four kinds of successful verbal action, or these three kinds of successful mental action that have skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result. | T: so too, it is because of the threefold success of bodily kamma … … or it is because of the fourfold success of verbal kamma … or it is because of the threefold success of mental kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, that with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.
an10.217:34.3 | S: I don’t say that intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated are eliminated without being experienced. | T: “Bhikkhus, I do not say that there is a termination of volitional kamma that has been done and accumulated so long as one has not experienced its results,
an10.217:34.4 | S: And that may be in this very life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. | T: and that may be in this very life, or in the next rebirth, or on some subsequent occasion.
an10.217:34.5 | S: But in any case, there is no making an end of suffering without experiencing intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated, I say.” | T: But I do not say that there is making an end of suffering so long as one has not experienced the results of volitional kammas that have been done and accumulated.”

