## an10.40
an10.40:1.1 | S: “Sir, they speak of ‘harmony in the Saṅgha’. | T: “Bhante, it is said: ‘Concord in the Saṅgha, concord in the Saṅgha.’
an10.40:1.2 | S: How is harmony in the Saṅgha defined?” | T: How is there concord in the Saṅgha?”
an10.40:1.3 | S: “Ānanda, it’s when a mendicant explains what is not the teaching as not the teaching, and what is the teaching as the teaching. They explain what is not the training as not the training, and what is the training as the training. They explain what was not spoken and stated by the Realized One as not spoken and stated by the Realized One, and what was spoken and stated by the Realized One as spoken and stated by the Realized One. They explain what was not practiced by the Realized One as not practiced by the Realized One, and what was practiced by the Realized One as practiced by the Realized One. They explain what was not prescribed by the Realized One as not prescribed by the Realized One, and what was prescribed by the Realized One as prescribed by the Realized One. | T: “Here, Ānanda, (1) bhikkhus explain non-Dhamma as non-Dhamma … as in 10:38 … and (10) what has been prescribed by the Tathāgata as having been prescribed by him.
an10.40:1.4 | S: On these ten grounds they don’t split off and go their own way. They don’t perform legal acts autonomously or recite the monastic code autonomously. | T: On these ten grounds they do not withdraw and go apart. They do not perform legal acts separately or recite the Pātimokkha separately. It is in this way,
an10.40:1.5 | S: That is how harmony in the Saṅgha is defined.” | T: Ānanda, that there is concord in the Saṅgha.”
an10.40:2.1 | S: “But sir, what does someone who has forged harmony in a schismatic Saṅgha brim with?” | T: “But, Bhante, when one reconciles a divided Saṅgha, what does one generate?”
an10.40:2.2 | S: “They brim with divine merit.” | T: “One generates divine merit, Ānanda.”
an10.40:2.3 | S: “But what is divine merit?” | T: “But, Bhante, what is divine merit?”
an10.40:2.4 | S: “They rejoice in heaven for an eon, Ānanda. | T: “One rejoices in heaven for an eon, Ānanda.”
an10.40:3.1 | S: A Saṅgha in harmony is happy, | T: Pleasant is concord in the Saṅgha,
an10.40:3.2 | S: as is support for those in harmony. | T: and the mutual help of those who live in concord.
an10.40:3.3 | S: Taking a stand on the teaching, | T: Delighting in concord, established in Dhamma,
an10.40:3.4 | S: favoring harmony, they ruin no sanctuary. | T: one does not fall away from security from bondage.
an10.40:3.5 | S: After forging harmony in the Saṅgha, | T: Having brought concord to the Saṅgha,
an10.40:3.6 | S: they rejoice in heaven for an eon.” | T: one rejoices in heaven for an eon.

## an10.51
an10.51:1.1 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
an10.51:1.2 | S: There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, | T: There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus:
an10.51:1.3 | S: “Mendicants!” | T: “Bhikkhus!”
an10.51:1.4 | S: “Venerable sir,” they replied. | T: “Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
an10.51:1.5 | S: The Buddha said this: | T: The Blessed One said this:
an10.51:2.1 | S: “Mendicants, if a mendicant isn’t skilled in encompassing another’s mind, then they should train themselves: ‘I will be skilled in encompassing my own mind.’ | T: “Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who is not skilled in the ways of others’ minds should train: ‘I will be skilled in the ways of my own mind.’
an10.51:2.2 | P: evañhi vo, bhikkhave, sikkhitabbaṁ. | T: It is in this way that you should train yourselves.
an10.51:3.1 | S: And how is a mendicant skilled in encompassing their own mind? | T: “And how is a bhikkhu skilled in the ways of his own mind?
an10.51:3.2 | S: Suppose there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of adornments, and they check their own reflection in a clean bright mirror or a clear bowl of water. If they see any dirt or blemish there, they’d try to remove it. | T: It is just as if a woman or a man—young, youthful, and fond of ornaments—would look at her or his own facial reflection in a clean bright mirror or in a bowl of clear water. If they see any dust or blemish there, they will make an effort to remove it.
an10.51:3.3 | S: But if they don’t see any dirt or blemish there, they’re happy with that, as they’ve got all they wished for: | T: But if they do not see any dust or blemish there, they will be glad about it; and their wish fulfilled, they will think,
an10.51:3.4 | S: ‘How fortunate that I’m clean!’ | T: ‘How fortunate that I’m clean!’
an10.51:3.5 | S: In the same way, checking is very helpful for a mendicant’s skillful qualities. | T: So too, self-examination is very helpful for a bhikkhu to grow in wholesome qualities.
an10.51:3.6 | S: ‘Am I often covetous or not? Am I often malicious or not? Am I often overcome with dullness and drowsiness or not? Am I often restless or not? Am I often doubtful or not? Am I often irritable or not? Am I often corrupted in mind or not? Am I often disturbed in body or not? Am I often energetic or not? Am I often immersed in samādhi or not?’ | T: “One should ask oneself: (1) ‘Am I often given to longing or without longing? (2) Am I often given to ill will or without ill will? (3) Am I often overcome by dullness and drowsiness or free from dullness and drowsiness? (4) Am I often restless or calm? (5) Am I often plagued by doubt or free from doubt? (6) Am I often angry or without anger? (7) Is my mind often defiled or undefiled? (8) Is my body often agitated or unagitated? (9) Am I often lazy or energetic? (10) Am I often unconcentrated or concentrated?’
an10.51:4.1 | S: Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this: | T: “If, by such self-examination, a bhikkhu knows:
an10.51:4.2 | S: ‘I am often covetous, malicious, overcome with dullness and drowsiness, restless, doubtful, irritable, corrupted in mind, disturbed in body, lazy, and not immersed in samādhi.’ In order to give up those bad, unskillful qualities, they should apply extraordinary enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness. | T: ‘I am often given to longing, given to ill will, overcome by dullness and drowsiness, restless, plagued by doubt, angry, defiled in mind, agitated in body, lazy, and unconcentrated,’ he should put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to abandon those same bad unwholesome qualities.
an10.51:4.3 | S: Suppose your clothes or head were on fire. In order to extinguish it, you’d apply extraordinary enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness. | T: Just as one whose clothes or head had caught fire would put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to extinguish the fire on his clothes or head,
an10.51:4.4 | S: In the same way, in order to give up those bad, unskillful qualities, that mendicant should apply extraordinary enthusiasm … | T: so too that bhikkhu should put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to abandon those same bad unwholesome qualities.
an10.51:5.1 | S: But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this: | T: “But if, by such self-examination, a bhikkhu knows:
an10.51:5.2 | S: ‘I am often content, kind-hearted, rid of dullness and drowsiness, calm, confident, loving, pure in mind, undisturbed in body, energetic, and immersed in samādhi.’ Grounded on those skillful qualities, they should practice meditation further to end the defilements.” | T: ‘I am often without longing, without ill will, free from dullness and drowsiness, calm, free from doubt, without anger, undefiled in mind, unagitated in body, energetic, and concentrated,’ he should base himself on those same wholesome qualities and make a further effort to reach the destruction of the taints.”

## an10.56
an10.56:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, these ten perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are very fruitful and beneficial. They have freedom from death as their objective and culmination. | T: “Bhikkhus, these ten perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as their consummation.
an10.56:1.2 | S: What ten? | T: What ten?
an10.56:1.3 | S: The perceptions of ugliness, death, repulsiveness of food, dissatisfaction with the whole world, impermanence, suffering in impermanence, and not-self in suffering, giving up, fading away, and cessation. | T: (1) The perception of unattractiveness, (2) the perception of death, (3) the perception of the repulsiveness of food, (4) the perception of non-delight in the entire world, (5) the perception of impermanence, (6) the perception of suffering in the impermanent, (7) the perception of non-self in what is suffering, (8) the perception of abandoning, (9) the perception of dispassion, and (10) the perception of cessation.
an10.56:1.4 | S: These ten perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are very fruitful and beneficial. They have freedom from death as their objective and culmination.” | T: These ten perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as their consummation.”

## an10.57
an10.57:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, these ten perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are very fruitful and beneficial. They have freedom from death as their objective and culmination. | T: “Bhikkhus, these ten perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as their consummation.
an10.57:1.2 | S: What ten? | T: What ten?
an10.57:1.3 | S: The perceptions of impermanence, not-self, death, repulsiveness of food, dissatisfaction with the whole world, a skeleton, a worm-infested corpse, a livid corpse, a split open corpse, and a bloated corpse. | T: (1) The perception of impermanence, (2) the perception of non-self, (3) the perception of death, (4) the perception of the repulsiveness of food, (5) the perception of non-delight in the entire world, (6) the perception of a skeleton, (7) the perception of a worm-infested corpse, (8) the perception of a livid corpse, (9) the perception of a fissured corpse, and (10) the perception of a bloated corpse.
an10.57:1.4 | S: These ten perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are very fruitful and beneficial. They have freedom from death as their objective and culmination.” | T: These ten perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as their consummation.”

## an10.58
an10.58:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, if wanderers of other religions were to ask: | T: “Bhikkhus, wanderers of other sects may ask you:
an10.58:1.2 | S: ‘Reverends, all things have what as their root? What produces them? What is their origin? What is their meeting place? What is their chief? What is their ruler? What is their overseer? What is their core? What is their objective? What is their culmination?’ How would you answer them?” | T: (1) ‘In what, friends, are all things rooted? (2) Through what do they come into being? (3) From what do they originate? (4) Upon what do they converge? (5) By what are they headed? (6) What exercises authority over them? (7) What is their supervisor? (8) What is their core? (9) In what do they culminate? (10) What is their consummation?’ If you are asked thus, how would you answer them?”
an10.58:1.3 | S: “Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge. Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The mendicants will listen and remember it.” | T: “Bhante, our teachings are rooted in the Blessed One, guided by the Blessed One, take recourse in the Blessed One. It would be good if the Blessed One would clear up the meaning of this statement. Having heard it from him, the bhikkhus will retain it in mind.”
an10.58:2.1 | S: “Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.” | T: “Then listen, bhikkhus, and attend closely. I will speak.”
an10.58:2.2 | S: “Yes, sir,” they replied. | T: “Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
an10.58:2.3 | S: The Buddha said this: | T: The Blessed One said this:
an10.58:3.1 | S: “Mendicants, if wanderers of other religions were to ask: | T: “Bhikkhus, if wanderers of other sects should ask you:
an10.58:3.2 | S: ‘Reverends, all things have what as their root? What produces them? What is their origin? What is their meeting place? What is their chief? What is their ruler? What is their overseer? What is their core? What is their objective? What is their culmination?’ | T: ‘What, friends, are all things rooted in? … … What is their consummation?’
an10.58:3.3 | S: You should answer them: | T: you should answer them as follows.
an10.58:3.4 | S: ‘Reverends, all things are rooted in desire. They are produced by application of mind. Contact is their origin. Feeling is their meeting place. Immersion is their chief. Mindfulness is their ruler. Wisdom is their overseer. Freedom is their core. Their objective is freedom from death. And extinguishment is their culmination.’ | T: “‘Friends, (1) all things are rooted in desire. (2) They come into being through attention. (3) They originate from contact. (4) They converge upon feeling. (5) They are headed by concentration. (6) Mindfulness exercises authority over them. (7) Wisdom is their supervisor. (8) Liberation is their core. (9) They culminate in the deathless. (10) Their consummation is nibbāna.’
an10.58:3.5 | S: When questioned by wanderers of other religions, that’s how you should answer them.” | T: “If you are asked thus, bhikkhus, it is in such a way that you should answer those wanderers of other sects.”

## an10.59
an10.59:1.1 | S: “So you should train like this: | T: “Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus:
an10.59:1.2 | S: ‘Our minds will be consolidated as they were when we went forth, and arisen bad unskillful qualities will not occupy our minds. | T: ‘Our minds will be strengthened in accordance with the spirit of our going forth, and arisen bad unwholesome qualities will not obsess our minds.
an10.59:1.3 | S: Our minds will be consolidated in the perceptions of impermanence, not-self, ugliness, and drawbacks. Knowing what is fair and unfair in the world, our minds will be consolidated in that perception. Knowing  existence and nonexistence in the world, our minds will be consolidated in that perception. Knowing the origin and disappearance of the world, our minds will be consolidated in that perception. Our minds will be consolidated in the perceptions of giving up, fading away, and cessation.’ | T: (1) Our minds will be strengthened in the perception of impermanence. (2) Our minds will be strengthened in the perception of non-self. (3) Our minds will be strengthened in the perception of unattractiveness. (4) Our minds will be strengthened in the perception of danger. (5) We will know the even and uneven ways of the world, and our minds will be strengthened in this perception. (6) We will know the coming into being and extermination of the world, and our minds will be strengthened in this perception. (7) We will know the origination and passing away of the world, and our minds will be strengthened in this perception. (8) Our minds will be strengthened in the perception of abandoning. (9) Our minds will be strengthened in the perception of dispassion. (10) Our minds will be strengthened in the perception of cessation.’
an10.59:1.4 | S: That’s how you should train. | T: It is in such a way that you should you train yourselves.
an10.59:2.1 | S: When your minds are consolidated in these ten perceptions, you can expect one of two results: | T: “When a bhikkhu’s mind has been strengthened in accordance with the spirit of his going forth, and arisen bad unwholesome qualities do not obsess his mind—when his mind has been strengthened in the perception of impermanence … when his mind has been strengthened in the perception of cessation—one of two fruits is to be expected for him:
an10.59:2.2 | S: enlightenment in this very life, or if there’s residue left behind, non-return.” | T: either final knowledge in this very life or, if there is a residue remaining, the state of non-returning.”

## an10.61
an10.61:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, it is said that no prior point of ignorance is found, before which there was no ignorance, and afterwards it came to be. | T: “Bhikkhus, this is said: ‘A first point of ignorance, bhikkhus, is not seen such that before this there was no ignorance and afterward it came into being.’
an10.61:1.2 | S: And yet it is evident that there is a specific condition for ignorance. | T: Still, ignorance is seen to have a specific condition.
an10.61:2.1 | S: I say that ignorance is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. | T: “I say, bhikkhus, that ignorance has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
an10.61:2.2 | S: And what is the fuel for ignorance? | T: And what is the nutriment for ignorance?
an10.61:2.3 | S: You should say: ‘The five hindrances.’ | T: It should be said: the five hindrances.
an10.61:2.4 | S: I say that the five hindrances are fueled by something, they’re not unfueled. | T: The five hindrances, too, I say, have a nutriment; they are not without nutriment.
an10.61:2.5 | S: And what is the fuel for the five hindrances? | T: And what is the nutriment for the five hindrances?
an10.61:2.6 | S: You should say: ‘The three kinds of misconduct.’ | T: It should be said: the three kinds of misconduct.
an10.61:2.7 | S: I say that the three kinds of misconduct are fueled by something, they’re not unfueled. | T: The three kinds of misconduct, too, I say, have a nutriment; they are not without nutriment.
an10.61:2.8 | S: And what is the fuel for the three kinds of misconduct? | T: And what is the nutriment for the three kinds of misconduct?
an10.61:2.9 | S: You should say: ‘Lack of sense restraint.’ | T: It should be said: non-restraint of the sense faculties.
an10.61:2.10 | S: I say that lack of sense restraint is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. | T: Non-restraint of the sense faculties, too, I say, has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
an10.61:2.11 | S: And what is the fuel for lack of sense restraint? | T: And what is the nutriment for non-restraint of the sense faculties?
an10.61:2.12 | S: You should say: ‘Lack of mindfulness and situational awareness.’ | T: It should be said: lack of mindfulness and clear comprehension.
an10.61:2.13 | S: I say that lack of mindfulness and situational awareness is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. | T: Lack of mindfulness and clear comprehension, too, I say, has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
an10.61:2.14 | S: And what is the fuel for lack of mindfulness and situational awareness? | T: And what is the nutriment for lack of mindfulness and clear comprehension?
an10.61:2.15 | S: You should say: ‘Irrational application of mind.’ | T: It should be said: careless attention.
an10.61:2.16 | S: I say that irrational application of mind is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. | T: Careless attention, too, I say, has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
an10.61:2.17 | S: And what is the fuel for irrational application of mind? | T: And what is the nutriment for careless attention?
an10.61:2.18 | S: You should say: ‘Lack of faith.’ | T: It should be said: lack of faith.
an10.61:2.19 | S: I say that lack of faith is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. | T: Lack of faith, too, I say, has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
an10.61:2.20 | S: And what is the fuel for lack of faith? | T: And what is the nutriment for lack of faith?
an10.61:2.21 | S: You should say: ‘Listening to an untrue teaching.’ | T: It should be said:
an10.61:2.22 | S: I say that listening to an untrue teaching is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. | T: not hearing the good Dhamma. Not hearing the good Dhamma, too, I say, has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
an10.61:2.23 | S: And what is the fuel for listening to an untrue teaching? | T: And what is the nutriment for not hearing the good Dhamma?
an10.61:2.24 | S: You should say: ‘Associating with untrue persons.’ | T: It should be said: not associating with good persons.
an10.61:3.1 | S: In this way, when the factor of associating with untrue persons is fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of listening to an untrue teaching. When the factor of listening to an untrue teaching is fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of lack of faith … irrational application of mind … lack of mindfulness and situational awareness … lack of sense restraint … the three kinds of misconduct … the five hindrances. When the five hindrances are fulfilled, they fulfill ignorance. | T: “Thus not associating with good persons, becoming full, fills up not hearing the good Dhamma. Not hearing the good Dhamma, becoming full, fills up lack of faith. Lack of faith, becoming full, fills up careless attention. Careless attention, becoming full, fills up lack of mindfulness and clear comprehension. Lack of mindfulness and clear comprehension, becoming full, fills up non-restraint of the sense faculties. Non-restraint of the sense faculties, becoming full, fills up the three kinds of misconduct. The three kinds of misconduct, becoming full, fill up the five hindrances. The five hindrances, becoming full, fill up ignorance.
an10.61:3.2 | S: That’s the fuel for ignorance, and that’s how it’s fulfilled. | T: Thus there is nutriment for ignorance,
an10.61:4.1 | S: It’s like when the heavens rain heavily on a mountain top, and the water flows downhill to fill the hollows, crevices, and creeks. As they become full, they fill up the pools. The pools fill up the lakes, the lakes fill up the streams, and the streams fill up the rivers. And as the rivers become full, they fill up the ocean. | T: and in this way it becomes full. “Just as, when it is raining and the rain pours down in thick droplets on a mountaintop, the water flows down along the slope and fills the clefts, gullies, and creeks; these, becoming full, fill up the pools; these, becoming full, fill up the lakes; these, becoming full, fill up the streams; these, becoming full, fill up the rivers; and these, becoming full, fill up the great ocean;
an10.61:4.2 | S: That’s the fuel for the ocean, and that’s how it’s filled up. | T: thus there is nutriment for the great ocean,
an10.61:5.1 | S: In the same way, when the factor of associating with untrue persons is fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of listening to an untrue teaching. When the factor of listening to an untrue teaching is fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of lack of faith … irrational application of mind … lack of mindfulness and situational awareness … lack of sense restraint … the three kinds of misconduct … the five hindrances. When the five hindrances are fulfilled, they fulfill ignorance. | T: and in this way it becomes full. So too, not associating with good persons, becoming full, fills up not hearing the good Dhamma…. The five hindrances, becoming full, fill up ignorance.
an10.61:5.2 | S: That’s the fuel for ignorance, and that’s how it’s fulfilled. | T: Thus there is nutriment for ignorance, and in this way it becomes full.
an10.61:6.1 | S: I say that knowledge and freedom are fueled by something, they’re not unfueled. | T: “I say, bhikkhus, that (1) true knowledge and liberation have a nutriment; they are not without nutriment.
an10.61:6.2 | S: And what is the fuel for knowledge and freedom? | T: And what is the nutriment for true knowledge and liberation?
an10.61:6.3 | S: You should say: ‘The seven awakening factors.’ | T: It should be said: (2) the seven factors of enlightenment.
an10.61:6.4 | S: I say that the seven awakening factors are fueled by something, they’re not unfueled. | T: The seven factors of enlightenment, too, I say, have a nutriment; they are not without nutriment.
an10.61:6.5 | S: And what is the fuel for the seven awakening factors? | T: And what is the nutriment for the seven factors of enlightenment?
an10.61:6.6 | S: You should say: ‘The four kinds of mindfulness meditation.’ | T: It should be said: (3) the four establishments of mindfulness.
an10.61:6.7 | S: I say that the four kinds of mindfulness meditation are fueled by something, they’re not unfueled. | T: The four establishments of mindfulness, too, I say, have a nutriment; they are not without nutriment.
an10.61:6.8 | S: And what is the fuel for the four kinds of mindfulness meditation? | T: And what is the nutriment for the four establishments of mindfulness?
an10.61:6.9 | S: You should say: ‘The three kinds of good conduct.’ | T: It should be said: (4) the three kinds of good conduct.
an10.61:6.10 | S: I say that the three kinds of good conduct are fueled by something, they’re not unfueled. | T: The three kinds of good conduct, too, I say, have a nutriment; they are not without nutriment.
an10.61:6.11 | S: And what is the fuel for the three kinds of good conduct? | T: And what is the nutriment for the three kinds of good conduct?
an10.61:6.12 | S: You should say: ‘Sense restraint.’ | T: It should be said: (5) restraint of the sense faculties.
an10.61:6.13 | S: I say that sense restraint is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. | T: Restraint of the sense faculties, too, I say, has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
an10.61:6.14 | S: And what is the fuel for sense restraint? | T: And what is the nutriment for restraint of the sense faculties?
an10.61:6.15 | S: You should say: ‘Mindfulness and situational awareness.’ | T: It should be said: (6) mindfulness and clear comprehension.
an10.61:6.16 | S: I say that mindfulness and situational awareness is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. | T: Mindfulness and clear comprehension, too, I say, have a nutriment; they are not without nutriment.
an10.61:6.17 | S: And what is the fuel for mindfulness and situational awareness? | T: And what is the nutriment for mindfulness and clear comprehension?
an10.61:6.18 | S: You should say: ‘Rational application of mind.’ | T: It should be said: (7) careful attention.
an10.61:6.19 | S: I say that rational application of mind is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. | T: Careful attention, too, I say, has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
an10.61:6.20 | S: And what is the fuel for rational application of mind? | T: And what is the nutriment for careful attention?
an10.61:6.21 | S: You should say: ‘Faith.’ | T: It should be said: (8) faith.
an10.61:6.22 | S: I say that faith is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. | T: Faith, too, I say, has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
an10.61:6.23 | S: And what is the fuel for faith? | T: And what is the nutriment for faith?
an10.61:6.24 | S: You should say: ‘Listening to the true teaching.’ | T: It should be said:
an10.61:6.25 | S: I say that listening to the true teaching is fueled by something, it’s not unfueled. | T: (9) hearing the good Dhamma. Hearing the good Dhamma, too, I say, has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
an10.61:6.26 | S: And what is the fuel for listening to the true teaching? | T: And what is the nutriment for hearing the good Dhamma?
an10.61:6.27 | S: You should say: ‘Associating with true persons.’ | T: It should be said: (10) associating with good persons.
an10.61:7.1 | S: In this way, when the factor of associating with true persons is fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of listening to the true teaching. When the factor of listening to the true teaching is fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of faith … rational application of mind … mindfulness and situational awareness … sense restraint … the three kinds of good conduct … the four kinds of mindfulness meditation … the seven awakening factors. When the seven awakening factors are fulfilled, they fulfill knowledge and freedom. | T: “Thus associating with good persons, becoming full, fills up hearing the good Dhamma. Hearing the good Dhamma, becoming full, fills up faith. Faith, becoming full, fills up careful attention. Careful attention, becoming full, fills up mindfulness and clear comprehension. Mindfulness and clear comprehension, becoming full, fill up restraint of the sense faculties. Restraint of the sense faculties, becoming full, fills up the three kinds of good conduct. The three kinds of good conduct, becoming full, fill up the four establishments of mindfulness. The four establishments of mindfulness, becoming full, fill up the seven factors of enlightenment. The seven factors of enlightenment, becoming full, fill up true knowledge and liberation.
an10.61:7.2 | S: That’s the fuel for knowledge and freedom, and that’s how it’s fulfilled. | T: Thus there is nutriment for true knowledge and liberation,
an10.61:8.1 | S: It’s like when the heavens rain heavily on a mountain top, and the water flows downhill to fill the hollows, crevices, and creeks. As they become full, they fill up the pools. The pools fill up the lakes, the lakes fill up the streams, and the streams fill up the rivers. And as the rivers become full, they fill up the ocean. | T: and in this way they become full. “Just as, when it is raining and the rain pours down in thick droplets on a mountaintop, the water flows down along the slope and fills the clefts, gullies, and creeks; these, becoming full, fill up the pools; these, becoming full, fill up the lakes; these, becoming full, fill up the streams; these, becoming full, fill up the rivers; and these, becoming full, fill up the great ocean;
an10.61:8.2 | S: That’s the fuel for the ocean, and that’s how it’s filled up. | T: thus there is nutriment for the great ocean,
an10.61:9.1 | S: In the same way, when the factor of associating with true persons is fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of listening to the true teaching. When the factor of listening to the true teaching is fulfilled, it fulfills the factor of faith … rational application of mind … mindfulness and situational awareness … sense restraint … the three kinds of good conduct … the four kinds of mindfulness meditation … the seven awakening factors. When the seven awakening factors are fulfilled, they fulfill knowledge and freedom. | T: and in this way it becomes full. So too, associating with good persons, becoming full, fills up hearing the good Dhamma…. The seven factors of enlightenment, becoming full, fill up true knowledge and liberation.
an10.61:9.2 | S: That’s the fuel for knowledge and freedom, and that’s how it’s fulfilled.” | T: Thus there is nutriment for true knowledge and liberation, and in this way they become full.”

## an10.6
an10.6:1.1 | S: Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: | T: Then the Venerable Ānanda approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and said to him:
an10.6:1.2 | S: “Could it be, sir, that a mendicant might gain a state of immersion like this? They wouldn’t perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn’t perceive the dimension of infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. And they wouldn’t perceive this world in this world, or the other world in the other world. And yet they would still perceive.” | T: “Bhante, could a bhikkhu obtain such a state of concentration that (1) he would not be percipient of earth in relation to earth; (2) of water in relation to water; (3) of fire in relation to fire; (4) of air in relation to air; (5) of the base of the infinity of space in relation to the base of the infinity of space; (6) of the base of the infinity of consciousness in relation to the base of the infinity of consciousness; (7) of the base of nothingness in relation to the base of nothingness; (8) of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception in relation to the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception; (9) of this world in relation to this world; (10) of the other world in relation to the other world, but he would still be percipient?”
an10.6:1.3 | S: “It could be, Ānanda, that a mendicant might gain a state of immersion like this. They wouldn’t perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn’t perceive the dimension of infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. And they wouldn’t perceive this world in this world, or the other world in the other world. And yet they would still perceive.” | T: “He could, Ānanda.”
an10.6:2.1 | S: “But how could this be, sir?” | T: “But how, Bhante, could he obtain such a state of concentration?”
an10.6:3.1 | S: “Ānanda, it’s when a mendicant perceives: | T: “Here, Ānanda, a bhikkhu is percipient thus:
an10.6:3.2 | S: ‘This is peaceful; this is sublime—that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation, extinguishment.’ | T: ‘This is peaceful, this is sublime, that is, the stilling of all activities, the relinquishing of all acquisitions, the destruction of craving, dispassion, cessation, nibbāna.’
an10.6:3.3 | S: That’s how a mendicant might gain a state of immersion like this. They wouldn’t perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn’t perceive the dimension of infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. And they wouldn’t perceive this world in this world, or the other world in the other world. And yet they would still perceive.” | T: It is in this way, Ānanda, that a bhikkhu could obtain such a state of concentration that he would not be percipient of earth in relation to earth; of water in relation to water; of fire in relation to fire; of air in relation to air; of the base of the infinity of space in relation to the base of the infinity of space; of the base of the infinity of consciousness in relation to the base of the infinity of consciousness; of the base of nothingness in relation to the base of nothingness; of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception in relation to the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception; of this world in relation to this world; of the other world in relation to the other world, but he would still be percipient.”

## an10.7
an10.7:1.1 | S: Then Venerable Ānanda went up to Venerable Sāriputta, and exchanged greetings with him. | T: Then the Venerable Ānanda approached the Venerable Sāriputta and exchanged greetings with him.
an10.7:1.2 | S: When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to Sāriputta: | T: When they had concluded their greetings and cordial talk, he sat down to one side and said to the Venerable Sāriputta:
an10.7:2.1 | S: “Could it be, reverend Sāriputta, that a mendicant might gain a state of immersion like this? They wouldn’t perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn’t perceive the dimension of infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. And they wouldn’t perceive this world in this world, or the other world in the other world. And yet they would still perceive.” | T: “Friend Sāriputta, could a bhikkhu obtain such a state of concentration that (1) he would not be percipient of earth in relation to earth; (2) of water in relation to water; (3) of fire in relation to fire; (4) of air in relation to air; (5) of the base of the infinity of space in relation to the base of the infinity of space; (6) of the base of the infinity of consciousness in relation to the base of the infinity of consciousness; (7) of the base of nothingness in relation to the base of nothingness; (8) of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception in relation to the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception; (9) of this world in relation to this world; (10) of the other world in relation to the other world, but he would still be percipient?”
an10.7:3.1 | S: “It could be, Reverend Ānanda.” | T: “He could, friend Ānanda.”
an10.7:4.1 | S: “But how could this be?” | T: “But how, friend Sāriputta, could he obtain such a state of concentration?”
an10.7:4.2 | S: “Reverend Ānanda, this one time I was staying right here at Sāvatthī in the Dark Forest. | T: “On one occasion, friend Ānanda, I was dwelling right here in Sāvatthī in the Blind Men’s Grove.
an10.7:4.3 | S: There I gained a state of immersion like this. I didn’t perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire in fire, or air in air. And I didn’t perceive the dimension of infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. And I didn’t perceive this world in this world, or the other world in the other world. And yet I still perceived.” | T: There I attained such a state of concentration that I was not percipient of earth in relation to earth; of water in relation to water; of fire in relation to fire; of air in relation to air; of the base of the infinity of space in relation to the base of the infinity of space; of the base of the infinity of consciousness in relation to the base of the infinity of consciousness; of the base of nothingness in relation to the base of nothingness; of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception in relation to the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception; of this world in relation to this world; of the other world in relation to the other world, but I was still percipient.”
an10.7:5.1 | S: “But at that time what did Reverend Sāriputta perceive?” | T: “But of what was the Venerable Sāriputta percipient on that occasion?”
an10.7:5.2 | S: “One perception arose in me and another perception ceased: ‘The cessation of continued existence is extinguishment. The cessation of continued existence is extinguishment.’ | T: “One perception arose and another perception ceased in me: ‘The cessation of existence is nibbāna; the cessation of existence is nibbāna.’
an10.7:5.3 | S: Suppose there was a burning pile of twigs. One flame would arise and another would cease. | T: Just as, when a fire of twigs is burning, one flame arises and another flame ceases,
an10.7:5.4 | S: In the same way, one perception arose in me and another perception ceased: ‘The cessation of continued existence is extinguishment. The cessation of continued existence is extinguishment.’ | T: so one perception arose and another perception ceased in me: ‘The cessation of existence is nibbāna; the cessation of existence is nibbāna.’
an10.7:5.5 | S: At that time I perceived that the cessation of continued existence is extinguishment.” | T: On that occasion, friend, I was percipient: ‘The cessation of existence is nibbāna.’”

## an10.8
an10.8:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, a mendicant is faithful but not ethical. | T: (1) “Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu may be endowed with faith but he is not virtuous;
an10.8:1.2 | S: So they’re incomplete in that respect, | T: thus he is incomplete with respect to that factor.
an10.8:1.3 | S: and should fulfill it, thinking: | T: He should fulfill that factor, thinking:
an10.8:1.4 | S: ‘How can I become faithful and ethical?’ | T: ‘How can I be endowed with faith and also be virtuous?’
an10.8:1.5 | S: When the mendicant is faithful and ethical, they’re complete in that respect. | T: But when a bhikkhu is endowed with faith and is also virtuous, then he is complete with respect to that factor.
an10.8:2.1 | S: A mendicant is faithful and ethical, but not learned. … | T: (2) “A bhikkhu may be endowed with faith and virtuous, but he is not learned …
an10.8:2.2 | S: they’re not a Dhamma speaker … | T: (3) … learned, but not a speaker on the Dhamma … (4) … a speaker on the Dhamma,
an10.8:2.3 | S: they don’t frequent assemblies … | T: but not one who frequents assemblies … (5) … one who frequents assemblies,
an10.8:2.4 | S: they don’t teach Dhamma to the assembly with assurance … | T: but not one who confidently teaches the Dhamma to an assembly … (6) … one who confidently teaches the Dhamma to an assembly,
an10.8:2.5 | S: they’re not an expert in the monastic law … | T: but not an expert on the discipline … (7) … an expert on the discipline,
an10.8:2.6 | S: they don’t stay in the wilderness, in remote lodgings … | T: but not a forest-dweller who resorts to remote lodgings … (8) … a forest-dweller who resorts to remote lodgings,
an10.8:2.7 | S: they don’t get the four absorptions—blissful meditations in this life that belong to the higher mind—when they want, without trouble or difficulty … | T: but not one who gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life … (9) … one who gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life,
an10.8:2.8 | S: they don’t realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, and live having realized it with their own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements. | T: but not one who, with the destruction of the taints, has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwells in it.
an10.8:2.9 | S: So they’re incomplete in that respect, | T: “Thus he is incomplete with respect to that factor.
an10.8:2.10 | S: and should fulfill it, thinking: | T: He should fulfill that factor, thinking:
an10.8:2.11 | S: ‘How can I become faithful, ethical, and learned, a Dhamma speaker, one who frequents assemblies, one who teaches Dhamma to the assembly with assurance, an expert in the training, one who lives in the wilderness, in remote lodgings, one who gets the four absorptions when they want, and one who lives having realized the ending of defilements?’ | T: ‘How can I be endowed with faith … … and also be one who, with the destruction of the taints, has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwells in it?’
an10.8:3.1 | S: When they’re faithful, ethical, and learned, a Dhamma speaker, one who frequents assemblies, one who teaches Dhamma to the assembly with assurance, an expert in the training, one who lives in the wilderness, in remote lodgings, one who gets the four absorptions when they want, and one who lives having realized the ending of defilements, | T: (10) “But when a bhikkhu is i endowed with faith, ii virtuous, and iii learned; iv a speaker on the Dhamma; v one who frequents assemblies; vi one who confidently teaches the Dhamma to an assembly; vii an expert on the discipline; viii a forest-dweller who resorts to remote lodgings; ix one who gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life; and x one who, with the destruction of the taints, has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwells in it,
an10.8:3.2 | S: they’re complete in that respect. | T: then he is complete with respect to that factor.
an10.8:3.3 | S: A mendicant who possesses these ten qualities is impressive all around, and is complete in every respect.” | T: “A bhikkhu who possesses these ten qualities is one who inspires confidence in all respects and who is complete in all aspects.”

## an10.9
an10.9:1.1 | S: “A mendicant is faithful, but not ethical. … | T: (1) “Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu may be endowed with faith but he is not virtuous … (2) … endowed with faith and virtuous,
an10.9:1.2 | S: they’re not learned. … | T: but he is not learned …
an10.9:1.3 | S: they’re not a Dhamma speaker … | T: (3) … learned, but not a speaker on the Dhamma … (4) … a speaker on the Dhamma,
an10.9:1.4 | S: they don’t frequent assemblies … | T: but not one who frequents assemblies … (5) … one who frequents assemblies,
an10.9:1.5 | S: they don’t teach Dhamma to the assembly with assurance … | T: but not one who confidently teaches the Dhamma to an assembly … (6) … one who confidently teaches the Dhamma to an assembly,
an10.9:1.6 | S: they’re not an expert in the training … | T: but not an expert on the discipline … (7) … an expert on the discipline,
an10.9:1.7 | S: they don’t stay in the wilderness, in remote lodgings … | T: but not a forest-dweller who resorts to remote lodgings … (8) … a forest-dweller who resorts to remote lodgings,
an10.9:1.8 | S: they don’t have direct meditative experience of the peaceful liberations that are formless, transcending form … | T: but not one who contacts with the body and dwells in those peaceful emancipations, transcending forms, that are formless … (9) … one who contacts with the body and dwells in those peaceful emancipations, transcending forms, that are formless,
an10.9:1.9 | S: they don’t realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, and live having realized it with their own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements. | T: but not one who, with the destruction of the taints, has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwells in it.
an10.9:1.10 | S: So they’re incomplete in that respect, | T: “Thus he is incomplete with respect to that factor.
an10.9:1.11 | S: and should fulfill it, thinking: | T: He should fulfill that factor, thinking:
an10.9:1.12 | S: ‘How can I become faithful, ethical, and learned, a Dhamma speaker, one who frequents assemblies, one who teaches Dhamma to the assembly with assurance, an expert in the training, one who lives in the wilderness, in remote lodgings, one who gets the formless liberations, and one who lives having realized the ending of defilements?’ | T: ‘How can I be endowed with faith … and also be one who, with the destruction of the taints, has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwells in it?’ (10) “But when a bhikkhu is i endowed with faith, ii virtuous, and iii learned; iv a speaker on the Dhamma; v one who frequents assemblies; vi one who confidently teaches the Dhamma to an assembly; vii an expert on the discipline;
an10.9:2.1 | S: When they’re faithful, ethical, and learned, a Dhamma speaker, one who frequents assemblies, one who teaches Dhamma to the assembly with assurance, an expert in the monastic law, one who lives in the wilderness, in remote lodgings, one who gets the formless liberations, and one who lives having realized the ending of defilements, | T: viii a forest-dweller who resorts to remote lodgings; ix one who dwells having contacted with the body those peaceful emancipations, transcending forms, that are formless; and x one who, with the destruction of the taints, has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwells in it,
an10.9:2.2 | S: they’re complete in that respect. | T: then he is complete with respect to that factor.
an10.9:2.3 | S: A mendicant who possesses these ten qualities is impressive all around, and is complete in every respect.” | T: “A bhikkhu who possesses these ten qualities is one who inspires confidence in all respects and who is complete in all aspects.”

## an3.10
an3.10:1.1 | S: “Anyone who has three qualities, and has not given up three stains, is placed in hell as if delivered there. | T: “Bhikkhus, possessing three qualities and without having abandoned three stains, one is deposited in hell as if brought there.
an3.10:1.2 | S: What three? | T: What three?
an3.10:1.3 | S: They’re unethical, and haven’t given up the stain of immorality. | T: (1) One is immoral and has not abandoned the stain of immorality.
an3.10:1.4 | S: They’re jealous, and haven’t given up the stain of jealousy. | T: (2) One is envious and has not abandoned the stain of envy.
an3.10:1.5 | S: They’re stingy, and haven’t given up the stain of stinginess. | T: (3) One is miserly and has not abandoned the stain of miserliness.
an3.10:1.6 | S: Anyone who possesses these three qualities, and has not given up these three stains, is placed in hell as if delivered there. | T: Possessing these three qualities and without having abandoned these three stains, one is deposited in hell as if brought there.
an3.10:2.1 | S: Anyone who has three qualities, and has given up three stains, is placed in heaven as if delivered there. | T: “Bhikkhus, possessing three qualities and having abandoned three stains, one is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
an3.10:2.2 | S: What three? | T: What three?
an3.10:2.3 | S: They’re ethical, and have given up the stain of immorality. | T: (1) One is virtuous and has abandoned the stain of immorality.
an3.10:2.4 | S: They’re not jealous, and have given up the stain of jealousy. | T: (2) One is not envious and has abandoned the stain of envy.
an3.10:2.5 | S: They’re not stingy, and have given up the stain of stinginess. | T: (3) One is not miserly and has abandoned the stain of miserliness.
an3.10:2.6 | S: Anyone who possesses these three qualities, and has given up these three stains, is placed in heaven as if delivered there.” | T: Possessing these three qualities and having abandoned these three stains, one is deposited in heaven as if brought there.”

