## mn41
mn41:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
mn41:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he arrived at a village of the Kosalan brahmins named Sālā. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering by stages in the Kosalan Country with a large Sangha of bhikkhus, and eventually he arrived at a Kosalan brahmin village named Sālā.
mn41:2.1 | S: The brahmins and householders of Sālā heard, | T: The brahmin householders of Sālā heard:
mn41:2.2 | S: “It seems the ascetic Gotama—a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family—while wandering in the land of the Kosalans has arrived at Sālā, together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants. | T: “The recluse Gotama, the son of the Sakyans who went forth from a Sakyan clan, has been wandering in the Kosalan country with a large Sangha of bhikkhus and has come to Sālā.
mn41:2.3 | S: He has this good reputation: | T: Now a good report of Master Gotama has been spread to this effect:
mn41:2.4 | S: ‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ | T: ‘That Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened, blessed.
mn41:2.5 | S: He has realized with his own insight this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—and he makes it known to others. | T: He declares this world with its gods, its Māras, and its Brahmās, this generation with its recluses and brahmins, its princes and its people, which he has himself realised with direct knowledge.
mn41:2.6 | S: He teaches Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. | T: He teaches the Dhamma good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing,
mn41:2.7 | S: He reveals an entirely full and pure spiritual life. | T: and he reveals a holy life that is utterly perfect and pure.’
mn41:2.8 | S: It’s good to see such perfected ones.” | T: Now it is good to see such arahants.”
mn41:3.1 | S: Then the brahmins and householders of Sālā went up to the Buddha. Before sitting down to one side, some bowed, some exchanged greetings and polite conversation, some held up their cupped palms toward the Buddha, some announced their name and clan, while some kept silent. Seated to one side they said to the Buddha: | T: Then the brahmin householders of Sālā went to the Blessed One. Some paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down at one side; some exchanged greetings with him, and when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, sat down at one side; some extended their hands in reverential salutation towards the Blessed One and sat down at one side; some pronounced their name and clan in the Blessed One’s presence and sat down at one side; some kept silent and sat down at one side. When they were seated, they said to the Blessed One:
mn41:4.1 | S: “What is the cause, worthy Gotama, what is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell? | T: “Master Gotama, what is the cause and condition why some beings here, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in states of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell?
mn41:4.2 | S: And what is the cause, worthy Gotama, what is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm?” | T: And what is the cause and condition why some beings here, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world?”
mn41:5.1 | S: “Unprincipled and immoral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: “Householders, it is by reason of conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, by reason of unrighteous conduct that some beings here, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in states of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.
mn41:5.2 | S: Principled and moral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.” | T: It is by reason of conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, by reason of righteous conduct that some beings here, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.”
mn41:6.1 | S: “We don’t understand the detailed meaning of the worthy Gotama’s brief statement. | T: “We do not understand the detailed meaning of Master Gotama’s utterance, which he has spoken in brief without expounding the detailed meaning.
mn41:6.2 | S: Worthy Gotama, please teach us this matter in detail so we can understand the meaning.” | T: It would be good if Master Gotama would teach us the Dhamma so that we might understand the detailed meaning of his utterance.”
mn41:6.3 | S: “Well then, householders, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.” | T: “Then, householders, listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”
mn41:6.4 | S: “Yes, worthy sir,” they replied. | T: “Yes, venerable sir,” they replied.
mn41:6.5 | S: The Buddha said this: | T: The Blessed One said this:
mn41:7.1 | S: “Householders, unprincipled and immoral conduct is threefold by way of body, fourfold by way of speech, and threefold by way of mind. | T: “Householders, there are three kinds of bodily conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct. There are four kinds of verbal conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct. There are three kinds of mental conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct.
mn41:8.1 | S: And how is unprincipled and immoral conduct threefold by way of body? | T: “And how, householders, are there three kinds of bodily conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct?
mn41:8.2 | S: It’s when someone kills living creatures. They’re violent, bloody-handed, a hardened killer, merciless to living beings. | T: Here someone kills living beings; he is murderous, bloody-handed, given to blows and violence, merciless to living beings.
mn41:8.3 | S: They steal. With the intention to commit theft, they take the wealth or belongings of others from village or wilderness. | T: He takes what is not given; he takes by way of theft the wealth and property of others in the village or forest.
mn41:8.4 | S: They commit sexual misconduct. They have relations with women who have their mother, father, both mother and father, brother, sister, relatives, or clan as guardian. They have relations with a woman who is protected on principle, or who has a husband, or whose violation is punishable by law, or even one who has been garlanded as a token of betrothal. | T: He misconducts himself in sensual pleasures; he has intercourse with women who are protected by their mother, father, mother and father, brother, sister, or relatives, who have a husband, who are protected by law, and even with those who are garlanded in token of betrothal.
mn41:8.5 | S: This is how unprincipled and immoral conduct is threefold by way of body. | T: That is how there are three kinds of bodily conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct.
mn41:9.1 | S: And how is unprincipled and immoral conduct fourfold by way of speech? | T: “And how, householders, are there four kinds of verbal conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct?
mn41:9.2 | S: It’s when someone lies. They’re summoned to a council, an assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to bear witness: ‘Please, my friend, say what you know.’ Not knowing, they say ‘I know.’ Knowing, they say ‘I don’t know.’ Not seeing, they say ‘I see.’ And seeing, they say ‘I don’t see.’ So they deliberately lie for the sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly reason. | T: Here someone speaks falsehood; when summoned to a court, or to a meeting, or to his relatives’ presence, or to his guild, or to the royal family’s presence, and questioned as a witness thus: ‘So, good man, tell what you know,’ not knowing, he says, ‘I know,’ or knowing, he says, ‘I do not know’; not seeing, he says, ‘I see,’ or seeing, he says, ‘I do not see’; in full awareness he speaks falsehood for his own ends, or for another’s ends, or for some trifling worldly end.
mn41:9.3 | S: They backbite. They repeat in one place what they heard in another so as to divide people against each other. And so they divide those who are harmonious, supporting division, delighting in division, loving division, speaking words that promote division. | T: He speaks maliciously; he repeats elsewhere what he has heard here in order to divide those people from these, or he repeats to these people what he has heard elsewhere in order to divide these people from those; thus he is one who divides those who are united, a creator of divisions, who enjoys discord, rejoices in discord, delights in discord, a speaker of words that create discord.
mn41:9.4 | S: They speak harshly. They use the kinds of words that are cruel, nasty, hurtful, offensive, bordering on anger, not leading to immersion. | T: He speaks harshly; he utters such words as are rough, hard, hurtful to others, offensive to others, bordering on anger, unconducive to concentration.
mn41:9.5 | S: They talk nonsense. Their speech is untimely, and is neither factual nor beneficial. It has nothing to do with the teaching or the training. Their words have no value, and are untimely, unreasonable, rambling, and pointless. | T: He is a gossip; he speaks at the wrong time, speaks what is not fact, speaks what is useless, speaks contrary to the Dhamma and the Discipline; at the wrong time he speaks such words as are worthless, unreasonable, immoderate, and unbeneficial.
mn41:9.6 | S: This is how unprincipled and immoral conduct is fourfold by way of speech. | T: That is how there are four kinds of verbal conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct.
mn41:10.1 | S: And how is unprincipled and immoral conduct threefold by way of mind? | T: “And how, householders, are there three kinds of mental conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct?
mn41:10.2 | S: It’s when someone is covetous. They covet the wealth and belongings of others: ‘Oh, if only their belongings were mine!’ | T: Here someone is covetous; he covets the wealth and property of others thus: ‘Oh, may what belongs to another be mine!’
mn41:10.3 | S: They have ill will and malicious intentions: ‘May these sentient beings be killed, slaughtered, slain, destroyed, or annihilated!’ | T: Or he has a mind of ill will and intentions of hate thus: ‘May these beings be slain and slaughtered, may they be cut off, perish, or be annihilated!’
mn41:10.4 | S: They have wrong view. Their perspective is distorted: | T: Or he has wrong view, distorted vision, thus:
mn41:10.5 | S: ‘There’s no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There’s no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There’s no afterlife. There’s no such thing as mother and father, or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there’s no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ | T: ‘There is nothing given, nothing offered, nothing sacrificed; no fruit or result of good and bad actions; no this world, no other world; no mother, no father; no beings who are reborn spontaneously; no good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who have themselves realised by direct knowledge and declare this world and the other world.’
mn41:10.6 | S: This is how unprincipled and immoral conduct is threefold by way of mind. | T: That is how there are three kinds of mental conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct.
mn41:10.7 | S: That’s how unprincipled and immoral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: So, householders, it is by reason of such conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, by reason of such unrighteous conduct that some beings here on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in states of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.
mn41:11.1 | S: Householders, principled and moral conduct is threefold by way of body, fourfold by way of speech, and threefold by way of mind. | T: “Householders, there are three kinds of bodily conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct. There are four kinds of verbal conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct. There are three kinds of mental conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct.
mn41:12.1 | S: And how is principled and moral conduct threefold by way of body? | T: “And how, householders, are there three kinds of bodily conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct?
mn41:12.2 | S: It’s when someone gives up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. They’re scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for all living beings. | T: Here someone, abandoning the killing of living beings, abstains from killing living beings; with rod and weapon laid aside, gentle and kindly, he abides compassionate to all living beings.
mn41:12.3 | S: They give up stealing. They don’t, with the intention to commit theft, take the wealth or belongings of others from village or wilderness. | T: Abandoning the taking of what is not given, he abstains from taking what is not given; he does not take by way of theft the wealth and property of others in the village or in the forest.
mn41:12.4 | S: They give up sexual misconduct. They don’t have relations with women who have their mother, father, both mother and father, brother, sister, relatives, or clan as guardian. They don’t have relations with a woman who is protected on principle, or who has a husband, or whose violation is punishable by law, or even one who has been garlanded as a token of betrothal. | T: Abandoning misconduct in sensual pleasures, he abstains from misconduct in sensual pleasures; he does not have intercourse with women who are protected by their mother, father, mother and father, brother, sister, or relatives, who have a husband, who are protected by law, or with those who are garlanded in token of betrothal.
mn41:12.5 | S: This is how principled and moral conduct is threefold by way of body. | T: That is how there are three kinds of bodily conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct.
mn41:13.1 | S: And how is principled and moral conduct fourfold by way of speech? | T: “And how, householders, are there four kinds of verbal conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct?
mn41:13.2 | S: It’s when someone gives up lying. They’re summoned to a council, an assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to bear witness: ‘Please, my friend, say what you know.’ Not knowing, they say ‘I don’t know.’ Knowing, they say ‘I know.’ Not seeing, they say ‘I don’t see.’ And seeing, they say ‘I see.’ So they don’t deliberately lie for the sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly reason. | T: Here someone, abandoning false speech, abstains from false speech; when summoned to a court, or to a meeting, or to his relatives’ presence, or to his guild, or to the royal family’s presence, and questioned as a witness thus: ‘So, good man, tell what you know,’ not knowing, he says, ‘I do not know,’ or knowing, he says, ‘I know’; not seeing, he says, ‘I do not see,’ or seeing, he says, ‘I see’; he does not in full awareness speak falsehood for his own ends, or for another’s ends, or for some trifling worldly end.
mn41:13.3 | S: They give up backbiting. They don’t repeat in one place what they heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead, they reconcile those who are divided and support those who are united, delighting in harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony. | T: Abandoning malicious speech, he abstains from malicious speech; he does not repeat elsewhere what he has heard here in order to divide those people from these, nor does he repeat to these people what he has heard elsewhere in order to divide these people from those; thus he is one who reunites those who are divided, a promoter of friendships, who enjoys concord, rejoices in concord, delights in concord, a speaker of words that promote concord.
mn41:13.4 | S: They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way that’s mellow, pleasing to the ear, endearing, going to the heart, polite, likable, and agreeable to the people. | T: Abandoning harsh speech, he abstains from harsh speech; he speaks such words as are gentle, pleasing to the ear, and loveable, as go to the heart, are courteous, desired by many, and agreeable to many.
mn41:13.5 | S: They give up talking nonsense. Their words are timely, true, and meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. They say things at the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial. | T: Abandoning gossip, he abstains from gossip; he speaks at the right time, speaks what is fact, speaks on what is good, speaks on the Dhamma and the Discipline; at the right time he speaks such words as are worth recording, reasonable, moderate, and beneficial.
mn41:13.6 | S: This is how principled and moral conduct is fourfold by way of speech. | T: That is how there are four kinds of verbal conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct.
mn41:14.1 | S: And how is principled and moral conduct threefold by way of mind? | T: “And how, householders, are there three kinds of mental conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct?
mn41:14.2 | S: It’s when someone is not covetous. They don’t covet the wealth and belongings of others: ‘Oh, if only their belongings were mine!’ | T: Here someone is not covetous; he does not covet the wealth and property of others thus: ‘Oh, may what belongs to another be mine!’
mn41:14.3 | S: They have a kind heart and loving intentions: ‘May these sentient beings live free of enmity and ill will, untroubled and happy!’ | T: His mind is without ill will and he has intentions free from hate thus: ‘May these beings be free from enmity, affliction and anxiety! May they live happily!’
mn41:14.4 | S: They have right view, an undistorted perspective: | T: He has right view, undistorted vision, thus:
mn41:14.5 | S: ‘There is meaning in giving, sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother and father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ | T: ‘There is what is given and what is offered and what is sacrificed; there is fruit and result of good and bad actions; there is this world and the other world; there is mother and father; there are beings who are reborn spontaneously; there are good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who have themselves realised by direct knowledge and declare this world and the other world.’
mn41:14.6 | S: This is how principled and moral conduct is threefold by way of mind. | T: That is how there are three kinds of mental conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct.
mn41:14.7 | S: This is how principled and moral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. | T: So, householders, it is by reason of such conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, by reason of such righteous conduct that some beings here, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.
mn41:15.1 | S: Someone of principled and moral conduct might wish: | T: “If, householders, one who observes conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct, should wish:
mn41:15.2 | S: ‘If only, when my body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of well-to-do aristocrats!’ | T: ‘Oh, that on the dissolution of the body, after death, I might reappear in the company of well-to-do nobles!’ it is possible that, on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in the company of well-to-do nobles.
mn41:15.3 | S: It’s possible that this might happen. | T: (none)
mn41:15.4 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn41:15.5 | S: Because they have principled and moral conduct. | T: Because he observes conduct that is in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct.
mn41:16-17.1 | S: Someone of principled and moral conduct might wish: | T: “If, householders, one who observes conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct, should wish:
mn41:16-17.2 | S: ‘If only, when my body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of well-to-do brahmins … | T: ‘Oh, that on the dissolution of the body, after death, I might reappear in the company of well-to-do brahmins!…in the company of well-to-do householders!’ it is possible that, on the dissolution of the body, after death,
mn41:16-17.3 | S: well-to-do householders … | T: he will reappear in the company of well-to-do householders.
mn41:16-17.5 | P: Taṁ kissa hetu? | T: Why is that?
mn41:16-17.6 | P: Tathā hi so dhammacārī samacārī. | T: Because he observes conduct that is in accordance with the Dhamma,
mn41:18-42.2 | S: the gods of the four great kings … | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.5 | P: Tathā hi so dhammacārī samacārī. | T: righteous conduct.
mn41:18-42.6 | P: Ākaṅkheyya ce, gahapatayo, dhammacārī samacārī: | T: “If, householders, one who observes conduct in accordance with the Dhamma,
mn41:18-42.7 | S: the gods of the thirty-three … | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.8 | S: the gods of Yama … | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.9 | S: the joyful gods … | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.10 | S: the gods who love to create … | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.11 | S: the gods who control what is created by others … | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.12 | S: the gods of the Divinity’s host … | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.15 | P: Tathā hi so dhammacārī samacārī. | T: righteous conduct,
mn41:18-42.17 | S: the luminous gods … | T: should wish:
mn41:18-42.22 | S: the gods of limited luminosity … | T: ‘Oh, that on the dissolution of the body, after death,
mn41:18-42.23 | S: the gods of limitless luminosity … | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.24 | S: the gods of sublime luminosity … | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.25 | S: the gods of limited beauty … | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.26 | S: the gods of limitless beauty … | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.27 | S: the gods of universal beauty … | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.28 | S: the gods of abundant fruit … | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.29 | S: the gods of Aviha … | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.30 | S: the gods of Atappa … | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.31 | S: the gods fair to see … | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.32 | S: the fair seeing gods … | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.33 | S: the gods of Akaniṭṭha … | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.34 | S: the gods of the dimension of infinite space … | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.35 | S: the gods of the dimension of infinite consciousness … | T: I might reappear in the company of the gods of the heaven of the Four Great Kings!…in the company of the gods of the heaven of the Thirty-three…the Yāma gods…the gods of the Tusita heaven…the gods who delight in creating…the gods who wield power over others’ creations…the gods of Brahmā’ s retinue…the gods of Radiance …the gods of Limited Radiance…the gods of Immeasurable Radiance…the gods of Streaming Radiance…the gods of Glory…the gods of Limited Glory…the gods of Immeasurable Glory…the gods of Refulgent Glory…the gods of Great Fruit…the Aviha gods…the Atappa gods…the Sudassa gods…the Sudassī gods…the Akaniṭṭha gods…the gods of the base of infinite space…the gods of the base of infinite consciousness…the gods of the base of nothingness…the gods of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception!’
mn41:18-42.36 | S: the gods of the dimension of nothingness … | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.37 | S: the gods of the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception.’ | T: (none)
mn41:18-42.38 | S: It’s possible that this might happen. | T: it is possible that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in the company of the gods of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
mn41:18-42.39 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn41:18-42.40 | S: Because they have principled and moral conduct. | T: Because he observes conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct.
mn41:43.1 | S: Someone of principled and moral conduct might wish: | T: “If, householders, one who observes conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct, should wish:
mn41:43.2 | S: ‘If only I might realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, and live having realized it with my own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements.’ | T: ‘Oh, that by realising for myself with direct knowledge I might here and now enter upon and abide in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints!’ it is possible that, by realising for himself with direct knowledge, he will here and now enter upon and abide in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints.
mn41:43.3 | S: It’s possible that this might happen. | T: (none)
mn41:43.4 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn41:43.5 | S: Because they have principled and moral conduct.” | T: Because he observes conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct.”
mn41:44.1 | S: When he had spoken, the brahmins and householders of Sālā said to the Buddha, | T: When this was said, the brahmin householders of Sālā said to the Blessed One:
mn41:44.2 | S: “Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! | T: “Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent, Master Gotama!
mn41:44.3 | S: As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, worthy Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. | T: Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the darkness for those with eyesight to see forms.
mn41:44.4 | S: We go for refuge to the worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. | T: We go to Master Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
mn41:44.5 | S: From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember us as lay followers who have gone for refuge for life.” | T: From today let Master Gotama accept us as lay followers who have gone to him for refuge for life.”

## an10.53
an10.53:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, I don’t praise stagnation in skillful qualities, let alone decline. | T: “Bhikkhus, I do not praise even a standstill in wholesome qualities, much less decline.
an10.53:1.2 | S: I praise growth in skillful qualities, not stagnation or decline. | T: I praise only growth in wholesome qualities, not a standstill or deterioration.
an10.53:2.1 | S: And how is there decline in skillful qualities, not stagnation or growth? | T: “And how is there deterioration—not a standstill or growth—in wholesome qualities?
an10.53:2.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant has a certain degree of faith, ethics, generosity, wisdom, and eloquence. Those qualities neither stagnate nor grow in them. | T: Here, a bhikkhu has a certain degree of faith, virtuous behavior, learning, renunciation, wisdom, and discernment. Those qualities of his do not remain the same or increase.
an10.53:2.3 | S: I call this decline in skillful qualities, not stagnation or growth. | T: This, I say, is deterioration rather than a standstill or growth in wholesome qualities.
an10.53:2.4 | S: This is how there’s decline in skillful qualities, not stagnation or growth. | T: Thus there is deterioration—not a standstill or growth—in wholesome qualities.
an10.53:3.1 | S: And how is there stagnation in skillful qualities, not decline or growth? | T: “And how is there a standstill—not deterioration or growth—in wholesome qualities?
an10.53:3.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant has a certain degree of faith, ethics, generosity, wisdom, and eloquence. Those qualities neither decline nor grow in them. | T: Here, a bhikkhu has a certain degree of faith, virtuous behavior, learning, renunciation, wisdom, and discernment. Those qualities of his do not deteriorate or increase.
an10.53:3.3 | S: I call this stagnation in skillful qualities, not decline or growth. | T: This, I say, is a standstill rather than deterioration or growth in wholesome qualities.
an10.53:3.4 | S: This is how there’s stagnation in skillful qualities, not decline or growth. | T: Thus there is a standstill—not deterioration or growth—in wholesome qualities.
an10.53:4.1 | S: And how is there growth in skillful qualities, not stagnation or decline? | T: “And how is there growth—not a stand still or deterioration—in wholesome qualities?
an10.53:4.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant has a certain degree of faith, ethics, generosity, wisdom, and eloquence. Those qualities neither stagnate nor decline in them. | T: Here, a bhikkhu has a certain degree of faith, virtuous behavior, learning, renunciation, wisdom, and discernment. Those qualities of his do not remain the same or deteriorate.
an10.53:4.3 | S: I call this growth in skillful qualities, not stagnation or decline. | T: This, I say, is growth rather than a standstill or deterioration in wholesome qualities.
an10.53:4.4 | S: This is how there’s growth in skillful qualities, not stagnation or decline. | T: Thus there is growth—not a standstill or deterioration—in wholesome qualities.
an10.53:5.1 | S: If a mendicant isn’t skilled in encompassing another’s mind, then they should train themselves: ‘I will be skilled in encompassing my own mind.’ | T: “Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who is not skilled in the ways of others’ minds should train:
an10.53:6.1 | S: And how is a mendicant skilled in encompassing their own mind? | T: ‘I will be skilled in the ways of my own mind.’
an10.53:6.2 | S: Suppose there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of adornments, and they check their own reflection in a clean bright mirror or a clear bowl of water. If they see any dirt or blemish there, they’d try to remove it. | T: (none)
an10.53:6.3 | S: But if they don’t see any dirt or blemish there, they’re happy with that, as they’ve got all they wished for: | T: (none)
an10.53:6.4 | S: ‘How fortunate that I’m clean!’ | T: … [97–98] …
an10.53:6.5 | S: In the same way, checking is very helpful for a mendicant’s skillful qualities. | T: (none)
an10.53:6.6 | S: ‘Am I often covetous or not? Am I often malicious or not? Am I often overcome with dullness and drowsiness or not? Am I often restless or not? Am I often doubtful or not? Am I often irritable or not? Am I often corrupted in mind or not? Am I often disturbed in body or not? Am I often energetic or not? Am I often immersed in samādhi or not?’ | T: (none)
an10.53:7.1 | S: Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this: | T: as in 10:51 down to:
an10.53:7.2 | S: ‘I am often covetous, malicious, overcome with dullness and drowsiness, restless, doubtful, irritable, corrupted in mind, disturbed in body, lazy, and not immersed in samādhi.’ In order to give up those bad, unskillful qualities, they should apply extraordinary enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness. | T: (none)
an10.53:7.3 | S: Suppose your clothes or head were on fire. In order to extinguish it, you’d apply extraordinary enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness. | T: (none)
an10.53:7.5 | S: In the same way, in order to give up those bad, unskillful qualities, that mendicant should apply extraordinary enthusiasm … | T: … But if, by such self-examination,
an10.53:8.1 | S: But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this: | T: a bhikkhu knows:
an10.53:8.2 | S: ‘I am often content, kind-hearted, rid of dullness and drowsiness, calm, confident, loving, pure in mind, undisturbed in body, energetic, and immersed in samādhi.’ Grounded on those skillful qualities, they should practice meditation further to end the defilements.” | T: ‘I am often without longing … and concentrated,’ then he should base himself on those same wholesome qualities and make a further effort to reach the destruction of the taints.”

## sn35.17
sn35.17:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, if there were no gratification in the eye, sentient beings wouldn’t be aroused by it. | T: “Bhikkhus, if there were no gratification in the eye, beings would not become enamoured with it;
sn35.17:1.2 | S: But since there is gratification in the eye, sentient beings are aroused by it. | T: but because there is gratification in the eye, beings become enamoured with it.
sn35.17:1.3 | S: If the eye had no drawback, sentient beings wouldn’t grow disillusioned with it. | T: If there were no danger in the eye, beings would not experience revulsion towards it;
sn35.17:1.4 | S: But since the eye has a drawback, sentient beings do grow disillusioned with it. | T: but because there is danger in the eye, beings experience revulsion towards it.
sn35.17:1.5 | S: If there were no escape from the eye, sentient beings wouldn’t escape from it. | T: If there were no escape from the eye, beings would not escape from it;
sn35.17:1.6 | S: But since there is an escape from the eye, sentient beings do escape from it. | T: but because there is an escape from the eye, beings escape from it.
sn35.17:1.7 | S: If there were no gratification in the ear … | T: “Bhikkhus, if there were no gratification in the ear … …
sn35.17:1.8 | S: nose … | T: in the nose …
sn35.17:1.9 | S: tongue … | T: in the tongue …
sn35.17:1.15 | S: body … | T: in the body …
sn35.17:1.16 | S: mind, sentient beings wouldn’t be aroused by it. | T: in the mind, beings would not become enamoured with it …
sn35.17:1.17 | S: But since there is gratification in the mind, sentient beings are aroused by it. | T: (none)
sn35.17:1.18 | S: If the mind had no drawback, sentient beings wouldn’t grow disillusioned with it. | T: (none)
sn35.17:1.19 | S: But since the mind has a drawback, sentient beings do grow disillusioned with it. | T: (none)
sn35.17:1.20 | S: If there were no escape from the mind, sentient beings wouldn’t escape from it. | T: (none)
sn35.17:1.21 | S: But since there is an escape from the mind, sentient beings do escape from it. | T: but because there is an escape from the mind, beings escape from it.
sn35.17:2.1 | S: As long as sentient beings don’t truly understand these six interior sense fields’ gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, they haven’t escaped from this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans—and they don’t live detached, liberated, with mind free of boundaries. | T: “So long, bhikkhus, as beings have not directly known as they really are the gratification as gratification, the danger as danger, and the escape as escape in the case of these six internal sense bases, they have not escaped from this world with its devas, Mara, and Brahma, from this generation with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans; they have not become detached from it, released from it, nor do they dwell with a mind rid of barriers.
sn35.17:2.2 | S: But when sentient beings truly understand these six interior sense fields’ gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, they’ve escaped from this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans—and they live detached, liberated, with mind free of boundaries.” | T: But when beings have directly known all this as it really is, then they have escaped from this world with its devas and humans … they have become detached from it, released from it, and they dwell with a mind rid of barriers.”

## sn35.24
sn35.24:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, I will teach you the principle for giving up the all. | T: “Bhikkhus, I will teach you the Dhamma for abandoning all.
sn35.24:1.2 | S: Listen … | T: Listen to that….
sn35.24:1.3 | S: And what is the principle for giving up the all? | T: “And what, bhikkhus, is the Dhamma for abandoning all?
sn35.24:1.4 | S: The eye should be given up. Sights should be given up. Eye consciousness should be given up. Eye contact should be given up. The painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on eye contact should also be given up. | T: The eye is to be abandoned, forms are to be abandoned, eye-consciousness is to be abandoned, eye-contact is to be abandoned, and whatever feeling arises with eye-contact as condition—whether pleasant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant—that too is to be abandoned.
sn35.24:1.5 | S: The ear … nose … | T: “The ear is to be abandoned …
sn35.24:1.6 | S: tongue … | T: (none)
sn35.24:1.7 | S: body … | T: (none)
sn35.24:1.8 | S: mind should be given up. Ideas should be given up. Mind consciousness should be given up. Mind contact should be given up. The painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on mind contact should be given up. | T: The mind is to be abandoned, mental phenomena are to be abandoned, mind-consciousness is to be abandoned, mind-contact is to be abandoned, and whatever feeling arises with mind-contact as condition—whether pleasant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant—that too is to be abandoned.
sn35.24:1.9 | S: This is the principle for giving up the all.” | T: “This, bhikkhus, is the Dhamma for abandoning all.”

## sn35.25
sn35.25:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, I will teach you the principle for giving up the all by direct knowledge and complete understanding. | T: “Bhikkhus, I will teach you the Dhamma for abandoning all through direct knowledge and full understanding.
sn35.25:1.2 | S: Listen … | T: Listen to that….
sn35.25:1.3 | S: And what is the principle for giving up the all by direct knowledge and complete understanding? | T: “And what, bhikkhus, is the Dhamma for abandoning all through direct knowledge and full understanding?
sn35.25:1.4 | S: The eye should be given up by direct knowledge and complete understanding. Sights should be given up by direct knowledge and complete understanding. Eye consciousness should be given up by direct knowledge and complete understanding. Eye contact should be given up by direct knowledge and complete understanding. The painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on eye contact should be given up by direct knowledge and complete understanding. | T: The eye is to be abandoned through direct knowledge and full understanding, forms are to be so abandoned, eye-consciousness is to be so abandoned, eye-contact is to be so abandoned, and whatever feeling arises with eye-contact as condition—whether pleasant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant—that too is to be abandoned through direct knowledge and full understanding.
sn35.25:1.5 | S: The ear … nose … | T: “The ear is to be abandoned through direct knowledge and full understanding …
sn35.25:1.6 | S: tongue … | T: (none)
sn35.25:1.7 | S: body … | T: (none)
sn35.25:1.8 | S: mind should be given up by direct knowledge and complete understanding. Ideas should be given up by direct knowledge and complete understanding. Mind consciousness should be given up by direct knowledge and complete understanding. Mind contact should be given up by direct knowledge and complete understanding. The painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on mind contact should be given up by direct knowledge and complete understanding. | T: The mind is to be abandoned through direct knowledge and full understanding, mental phenomena are to be so abandoned, mind-consciousness is to be so abandoned, mind-contact is to be so abandoned, and whatever feeling arises with mind-contact as condition—whether pleasant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant—that too is to be abandoned through direct knowledge and full understanding.
sn35.25:1.9 | S: This is the principle for giving up the all by direct knowledge and complete understanding.” | T: “This, bhikkhus, is the Dhamma for abandoning all through direct knowledge and full understanding.”

## mn64
mn64:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
mn64:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
mn64:1.3 | S: There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, | T: There he addressed the bhikkhus thus:
mn64:1.4 | S: “Mendicants!” | T: “Bhikkhus.”—
mn64:1.5 | S: “Venerable sir,” they replied. | T: “Venerable sir,” they replied.
mn64:1.6 | S: The Buddha said this: | T: The Blessed One said this:
mn64:2.1 | S: “Mendicants, do you remember the five lower fetters taught by me?” | T: “Bhikkhus, do you remember the five lower fetters as taught by me?”
mn64:2.2 | S: When he said this, Venerable Māluṅkyaputta said to him, | T: When this was said, the venerable Mālunkyāputta replied:
mn64:2.3 | S: “Sir, I remember them.” | T: “Venerable sir,
mn64:2.4 | S: “But how do you remember them?” | T: (none)
mn64:2.5 | S: “I remember the lower fetters taught by the Buddha as follows: substantialist view, | T: I remember the five lower fetters as taught by the Blessed One.” “But, Mālunkyāputta, in what way do you remember the five lower fetters as taught by me?” “Venerable sir, I remember identity view as a lower fetter taught by the Blessed One. I remember doubt as a lower fetter taught by the Blessed One.
mn64:2.6 | S: doubt, | T: I remember adherence to rules and observances as a lower fetter taught by the Blessed One.
mn64:2.7 | S: misapprehension of precepts and observances, | T: (none)
mn64:2.8 | S: sensual desire, | T: I remember sensual desire as a lower fetter taught by the Blessed One.
mn64:2.9 | S: and ill will. | T: (none)
mn64:2.10 | S: That’s how I remember the five lower fetters taught by the Buddha.” | T: I remember ill will as a lower fetter taught by the Blessed One. It is in this way, venerable sir, that I remember the five lower fetters as taught by the Blessed One.”
mn64:3.1 | S: “Who on earth do you remember being taught the five lower fetters in that way? | T: “Mālunkyāputta, to whom do you remember my having taught these five lower fetters in that way?
mn64:3.2 | S: Wouldn’t the wanderers of other religions fault you using the simile of the infant? | T: Would not the wanderers of other sects confute you with the simile of the infant?
mn64:3.3 | S: For a little baby doesn’t even have a concept of ‘substantial reality’, so how could substantialist view possibly arise in them? | T: For a young tender infant lying prone does not even have the notion ‘identity,’ so how could identity view arise in him?
mn64:3.4 | S: Yet the underlying tendency to substantialist view still lies within them. | T: Yet the underlying tendency to identity view lies within him.
mn64:3.5 | S: A little baby doesn’t even have a concept of ‘teachings’, so how could doubt about the teachings possibly arise in them? | T: A young tender infant lying prone does not even have the notion ‘teachings,’ so how could doubt about the teachings arise in him?
mn64:3.6 | S: Yet the underlying tendency to doubt still lies within them. | T: Yet the underlying tendency to doubt lies within him.
mn64:3.7 | S: A little baby doesn’t even have a concept of ‘precepts’, so how could misapprehension of precepts and observances possibly arise in them? | T: A young tender infant lying prone does not even have the notion ‘rules,’ so how could adherence to rules and observances arise in him?
mn64:3.8 | S: Yet the underlying tendency to misapprehension of precepts and observances still lies within them. | T: Yet the underlying tendency to adhere to rules and observances lies within him.
mn64:3.9 | S: A little baby doesn’t even have a concept of ‘sensual pleasures’, so how could desire for sensual pleasures possibly arise in them? | T: A young tender infant lying prone does not even have the notion ‘sensual pleasures,’ so how could sensual desire arise in him?
mn64:3.10 | S: Yet the underlying tendency to sensual desire still lies within them. | T: Yet the underlying tendency to sensual lust lies within him.
mn64:3.11 | S: A little baby doesn’t even have a concept of ‘sentient beings’, so how could ill will for sentient beings possibly arise in them? | T: A young tender infant lying prone does not even have the notion ‘beings,’ so how could ill will towards beings arise in him?
mn64:3.12 | S: Yet the underlying tendency to ill will still lies within them. | T: Yet the underlying tendency to ill will lies within him.
mn64:3.13 | S: Wouldn’t the wanderers of other religions fault you using the simile of the infant?” | T: Would not the wanderers of other sects confute you with this simile of the infant?”
mn64:4.1 | S: When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha, | T: Thereupon, the venerable Ānanda said:
mn64:4.2 | S: “Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One! | T: “It is the time, Blessed One, it is the time, Sublime One,
mn64:4.3 | S: May the Buddha teach the five lower fetters. The mendicants will listen and remember it.” | T: for the Blessed One to teach the five lower fetters. Having heard it from the Blessed One, the bhikkhus will remember it.”
mn64:4.4 | S: “Well then, Ānanda, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.” | T: “Then listen, Ānanda, and attend closely to what I shall say.”
mn64:4.5 | S: “Yes, sir,” Ānanda replied. | T: “Yes, venerable sir,” the venerable Ānanda replied.
mn64:4.6 | S: The Buddha said this: | T: The Blessed One said this:
mn64:5.1 | S: “Ānanda, take an unlearned ordinary person who has not seen the noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve not seen true persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the true persons. | T: “Here, Ānanda, an untaught ordinary person who has no regard for noble ones and is unskilled and undisciplined in their Dhamma, who has no regard for true men and is unskilled and undisciplined in their Dhamma,
mn64:5.2 | S: Their heart is overcome and mired in substantialist view, | T: abides with a mind obsessed and enslaved by identity view,
mn64:5.3 | S: and they don’t truly understand the escape from substantialist view that has arisen. | T: and he does not understand as it actually is the escape from the arisen identity view;
mn64:5.4 | S: That substantialist view is entrenched in them, not eliminated: it is a lower fetter. | T: and when that identity view has become habitual and is uneradicated in him, it is a lower fetter.
mn64:5.5 | S: Their heart is overcome and mired in doubt, | T: (none)
mn64:5.6 | S: and they don’t truly understand the escape from doubt that has arisen. | T: (none)
mn64:5.7 | S: That doubt is entrenched in them, not eliminated: it is a lower fetter. | T: (none)
mn64:5.8 | S: Their heart is overcome and mired in misapprehension of precepts and observances, | T: (none)
mn64:5.9 | S: and they don’t truly understand the escape from misapprehension of precepts and observances that has arisen. | T: (none)
mn64:5.10 | S: That misapprehension of precepts and observances is entrenched in them, not eliminated: it is a lower fetter. | T: He abides with a mind obsessed and enslaved by doubt…by adherence to rules and observances …by sensual lust …by ill will,
mn64:5.11 | S: Their heart is overcome and mired in sensual desire, | T: (none)
mn64:5.12 | S: and they don’t truly understand the escape from sensual desire that has arisen. | T: (none)
mn64:5.13 | S: That sensual desire is entrenched in them, not eliminated: it is a lower fetter. | T: (none)
mn64:5.14 | S: Their heart is overcome and mired in ill will, | T: (none)
mn64:5.15 | S: and they don’t truly understand the escape from ill will that has arisen. | T: and he does not understand as it actually is the escape from arisen ill will;
mn64:5.16 | S: That ill will is entrenched in them, not eliminated: it is a lower fetter. | T: and when that ill will has become habitual and is uneradicated in him, it is a lower fetter.
mn64:6.1 | S: But a learned noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve seen true persons, and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the true persons. Their heart is not overcome and mired in substantialist view, | T: “A well-taught noble disciple who has regard for noble ones and is skilled and disciplined in their Dhamma, who has regard for true men and is skilled and disciplined in their Dhamma, does not abide with a mind obsessed and enslaved by identity view;
mn64:6.2 | S: and they truly understand the escape from substantialist view that has arisen. | T: he understands as it actually is the escape from the arisen identity view,
mn64:6.3 | S: That substantialist view, along with any underlying tendency to it, is given up in them. | T: and identity view together with the underlying tendency to it is abandoned in him.
mn64:6.4 | S: Their heart is not overcome and mired in doubt, | T: (none)
mn64:6.5 | S: and they truly understand the escape from doubt that has arisen. | T: (none)
mn64:6.6 | S: That doubt, along with any underlying tendency to it, is given up in them. | T: (none)
mn64:6.7 | S: Their heart is not overcome and mired in misapprehension of precepts and observances, | T: (none)
mn64:6.8 | S: and they truly understand the escape from misapprehension of precepts and observances that has arisen. | T: (none)
mn64:6.9 | S: That misapprehension of precepts and observances, along with any underlying tendency to it, is given up in them. | T: He does not abide with a mind obsessed and enslaved by doubt…by adherence to rules and observances…by sensual lust…by ill will;
mn64:6.10 | S: Their heart is not overcome and mired in sensual desire, | T: (none)
mn64:6.11 | S: and they truly understand the escape from sensual desire that has arisen. | T: (none)
mn64:6.12 | S: That sensual desire, along with any underlying tendency to it, is given up in them. | T: (none)
mn64:6.13 | S: Their heart is not overcome and mired in ill will, | T: (none)
mn64:6.14 | S: and they truly understand the escape from ill will that has arisen. | T: he understands as it actually is the escape from the arisen ill will,
mn64:6.15 | S: That ill will, along with any underlying tendency to it, is given up in them. | T: and ill will together with the underlying tendency to it is abandoned in him.
mn64:6.16 | S: There is a path and a practice for giving up the five lower fetters. It’s not possible to know or see or give up the five lower fetters without relying on that path and that practice. | T: “There is a path, Ānanda, a way to the abandoning of the five lower fetters; that anyone, without relying on that path, on that way, shall know or see or abandon the five lower fetters—this is not possible.
mn64:6.17 | S: Suppose there was a large tree standing with heartwood. It’s not possible to cut out the heartwood without having cut through the bark and the softwood. | T: Just as when there is a great tree standing possessed of heartwood, it is not possible that anyone shall cut out its heartwood without cutting through its bark and sapwood,
mn64:6.18 | P: netaṁ ṭhānaṁ vijjati; | T: so too,
mn64:6.19 | S: In the same way, there is a path and a practice for giving up the five lower fetters. It’s not possible to know or see or give up the five lower fetters without relying on that path and that practice. | T: there is a path…this is not possible.
mn64:7.1 | S: But it is possible to know and see and give up the five lower fetters by relying on that path and that practice. | T: “There is a path, Ānanda, a way to the abandoning of the five lower fetters; that someone, by relying on that path, on that way, shall know and see and abandon the five lower fetters—this is possible.
mn64:8.1 | S: Suppose there was a large tree standing with heartwood. It is possible to cut out the heartwood after having cut through the bark and the softwood. | T: Just as, when there is a great tree standing possessed of heartwood, it is possible that someone shall cut out its heartwood by cutting through its bark and sapwood,
mn64:8.2 | S: In the same way, there is a path and a practice for giving up the five lower fetters. It is possible to know and see and give up the five lower fetters by relying on that path and that practice. | T: so too, there is a path…this is possible.
mn64:8.3 | S: Suppose the Ganges River was full to the brim so a crow could drink from it. | T: “Suppose, Ānanda, the river Ganges were full of water right up to the brim so that crows could drink from it,
mn64:8.4 | S: Then along comes a feeble person, who thinks: | T: and then a feeble man came thinking:
mn64:8.5 | S: ‘By swimming with my arms I’ll safely cross over to the far shore of the Ganges.’ | T: ‘By swimming across the stream with my arms, I shall get safely across to the further shore of this river Ganges’;
mn64:8.6 | S: But they’re not able to do so. | T: yet he would not be able to get safely across.
mn64:8.7 | S: In the same way, when the Dhamma is being taught to them for the cessation of substantial reality, those whose mind does not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided | T: So too, when the Dhamma is being taught to someone for the cessation of personality, if his mind does not enter into it and acquire confidence, steadiness, and resolution,
mn64:8.8 | S: should be regarded as being like that feeble person. | T: then he can be regarded as like the feeble man.
mn64:8.9 | S: Suppose the Ganges River was full to the brim so a crow could drink from it. | T: “Suppose, Ānanda, the river Ganges were full of water right up to the brim so that crows could drink from it,
mn64:8.10 | S: Then along comes a strong person, who thinks: | T: and then a strong man came thinking:
mn64:8.11 | S: ‘By swimming with my arms I’ll safely cross over to the far shore of the Ganges.’ | T: ‘By swimming across the stream with my arms, I shall get safely across to the further shore of this river Ganges’;
mn64:8.12 | S: And they are able to do so. | T: and he would be able to get safely across.
mn64:8.13 | S: In the same way, when the Dhamma is being taught to them for the cessation of substantial reality, those whose mind leaps forth, gains confidence, settles down, and becomes decided | T: So too, when the Dhamma is being taught to someone for the cessation of personality, if his mind enters into it and acquires confidence, steadiness, and resolution,
mn64:8.14 | S: should be regarded as being like that strong person. | T: then he can be regarded as like the strong man.
mn64:9.1 | S: And what, Ānanda, is the path and the practice for giving up the five lower fetters? | T: “And what, Ānanda, is the path, the way to the abandoning of the five lower fetters?
mn64:9.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant—due to the seclusion from attachments, the giving up of unskillful qualities, and the complete settling of physical discomforts—quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: Here, with seclusion from the acquisitions, with the abandoning of unwholesome states, with the complete tranquillization of bodily inertia, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
mn64:9.3 | S: They contemplate the phenomena there—included in form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness—as impermanent, as suffering, as diseased, as a boil, as a dart, as gloom, as an affliction, as alien, as breaking apart, as empty, as not-self. | T: “Whatever exists therein of material form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, he sees those states as impermanent, as suffering, as a disease, as a tumour, as a barb, as a calamity, as an affliction, as alien, as disintegrating, as void, as not self.
mn64:9.4 | S: They turn their mind away from those things, | T: He turns his mind away from those states and directs it towards the deathless element thus:
mn64:9.5 | S: and apply it to the element free of death: | T: (none)
mn64:9.6 | S: ‘This is peaceful; this is sublime—that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation, extinguishment.’ | T: ‘This is the peaceful, this is the sublime, that is, the stilling of all formations, the relinquishing of all attachments, the destruction of craving, dispassion, cessation, Nibbāna.’
mn64:9.7 | S: Abiding in that they attain the ending of defilements. | T: If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints.
mn64:9.8 | S: If they don’t attain the ending of defilements, with the ending of the five lower fetters they’re reborn spontaneously, because of their passion and love for that meditation. They are extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. | T: But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints because of that desire for the Dhamma, that delight in the Dhamma, then with the destruction of the five lower fetters he becomes one due to reappear spontaneously in the Pure Abodes and there attain final Nibbāna without ever returning from that world.
mn64:9.9 | S: This is the path and the practice for giving up the five lower fetters. | T: This is the path, the way to the abandoning of the five lower fetters.
mn64:10-12.1 | S: Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption … | T: “Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second jhāna…Again, with the fading away as well of rapture,
mn64:10-12.2 | S: third absorption … | T: a bhikkhu…enters upon and abides in the third jhāna…Again,a with the abandoning of pleasure and pain…a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna,
mn64:10-12.3 | S: fourth absorption. | T: (none)
mn64:10-12.4 | S: They contemplate the phenomena there—included in form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness—as impermanent … | T: which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity. “Whatever exists therein of material form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, he sees those states as impermanent…as not self.
mn64:10-12.5 | S: They turn their mind away from those things … | T: He turns his mind away from those states and directs it towards the deathless element…This is the path,
mn64:10-12.6 | S: If they don’t attain the ending of defilements, they’re reborn spontaneously … and are not liable to return from that world. | T: (none)
mn64:10-12.7 | S: This too is the path and the practice for giving up the five lower fetters. | T: the way to the abandoning of the five lower fetters.
mn64:13.1 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite’, enters and remains in the dimension of infinite space. | T: “Again, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of sensory impact, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infinite space.
