## mn118
mn118:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Introductory Section Thus have I heard.
mn118:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother in the Eastern Monastery, together with several well-known senior disciples, such as | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in the Eastern Park, in the Palace of Migāra’s Mother, together with many very well known elder disciples—
mn118:1.3 | S: the venerables Sāriputta, Mahāmoggallāna, Mahākassapa, Mahākaccāna, Mahākoṭṭhita, Mahākappina, Mahācunda, Anuruddha, Revata, Ānanda, and others. | T: the venerable Sāriputta, the venerable Mahā Moggallāna, the venerable Mahā Kassapa, the venerable Mahā Kaccāna, the venerable Mahā Koṭṭhita, the venerable Mahā Kappina, the venerable Mahā Cunda, the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable Revata, the venerable Ānanda, and other very well known elder disciples.
mn118:2.1 | S: Now at that time the senior monks were advising and instructing the junior monks. | T: Now on that occasion elder bhikkhus had been teaching and instructing new bhikkhus;
mn118:2.2 | S: Some senior monks instructed ten monks, while some instructed twenty, thirty, or forty. | T: some elder bhikkhus had been teaching and instructing ten bhikkhus, some elder bhikkhus had been teaching and instructing twenty…thirty…forty bhikkhus.
mn118:2.3 | S: Being instructed by the senior monks, the junior monks realized a higher distinction than they had before. | T: And the new bhikkhus, taught and instructed by the elder bhikkhus, had achieved successive stages of high distinction.
mn118:3.1 | S: Now, at that time it was the sabbath—the full moon on the fifteenth day—and the Buddha was sitting surrounded by the Saṅgha of monks for the invitation to admonish. | T: On that occasion—the Uposatha day of the fifteenth, on the full-moon night of the Pavāraṇā ceremony—the Blessed One was seated in the open surrounded by the Sangha of bhikkhus.
mn118:3.2 | S: Then the Buddha looked around the Saṅgha of monks, who were so very silent. He addressed them: | T: Then, surveying the silent Sangha of bhikkhus, he addressed them thus:
mn118:4.1 | S: “I am satisfied, monks, with this practice. | T: “Bhikkhus, I am content with this progress. My mind is content with this progress.
mn118:4.2 | S: My heart is satisfied with this practice. | T: (none)
mn118:4.3 | S: So you should rouse up even more energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. | T: So arouse still more energy to attain the unattained, to achieve the unachieved, to realise the unrealised.
mn118:4.4 | S: I will wait here in Sāvatthī for the Komudī full moon of the fourth month.” | T: I shall wait here at Sāvatthī for the Komudī full moon of the fourth month.”
mn118:5.1 | S: Mendicants from around the country heard about this, | T: The bhikkhus of the countryside heard:
mn118:5.2 | P: “bhagavā kira tattheva sāvatthiyaṁ komudiṁ cātumāsiniṁ āgamessatī”ti. | T: “The Blessed One will wait there at Sāvatthī for the Komudī full moon of the fourth month.”
mn118:5.3 | S: and came down to Sāvatthī to see the Buddha. | T: And the bhikkhus of the countryside left in due course for Sāvatthī to see the Blessed One.
mn118:6.1 | S: And those senior monks instructed the junior monks even more. | T: And elder bhikkhus still more intensively taught and instructed new bhikkhus;
mn118:6.2 | S: Some senior monks instructed ten monks, while some instructed twenty, thirty, or forty. | T: some elder bhikkhus taught and instructed ten bhikkhus, some elder bhikkhus taught and instructed twenty…thirty…forty bhikkhus.
mn118:6.3 | S: Being instructed by the senior monks, the junior monks realized a higher distinction than they had before. | T: And the new bhikkhus, taught and instructed by the elder bhikkhus, achieved successive stages of high distinction.
mn118:7.1 | S: Now, at that time it was the sabbath—the Komudī full moon on the fifteenth day of the fourth month—and the Buddha was sitting in the open surrounded by the Saṅgha of monks. | T: On that occasion—the Uposatha day of the fifteenth, the full-moon night of the Komudī full moon of the fourth month—the Blessed One was seated in the open surrounded by the Sangha of bhikkhus.
mn118:7.2 | S: Then the Buddha looked around the Saṅgha of monks, who were so very silent. He addressed them: | T: Then, surveying the silent Sangha of bhikkhus, he addressed them thus:
mn118:8.1 | S: “This assembly has no chaff, monks, it is free of chaff, pure, and consolidated in the core. | T: “Bhikkhus, this assembly is free from prattle, this assembly is free from chatter. It consists purely of heartwood.
mn118:8.2 | S: Such is this Saṅgha of monks, such is this assembly! | T: Such is this Sangha of bhikkhus, such is this assembly.
mn118:8.3 | S: An assembly such as this is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with cupped palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world. | T: Such an assembly as is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an incomparable field of merit for the world—
mn118:8.4 | S: Such is this Saṅgha of monks, such is this assembly! | T: such is this Sangha of bhikkhus, such is this assembly.
mn118:8.5 | S: For an assembly such as this, giving little becomes much, while giving much becomes even more. | T: Such an assembly that a small gift given to it becomes great and a great gift greater—
mn118:8.6 | S: Such is this Saṅgha of monks, such is this assembly! | T: such is this Sangha of bhikkhus, such is this assembly.
mn118:8.7 | S: An assembly such as this is rarely seen in the world. | T: Such an assembly as is rare for the world to see—
mn118:8.8 | S: Such is this Saṅgha of monks, such is this assembly! | T: such is this Sangha of bhikkhus, such is this assembly.
mn118:8.9 | S: An assembly such as this is worth traveling many leagues to see, even if you have to carry your own provisions in a knapsack. | T: Such an assembly as would be worth journeying many leagues with a travel-bag to see—such is this Sangha of bhikkhus, such is this assembly.
mn118:9.1 | S: For in this Saṅgha there are perfected mendicants who have ended the defilements, completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their heart’s goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and are rightly freed through enlightenment. | T: “In this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who are arahants with taints destroyed, who have lived the holy life, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, reached their own goal, destroyed the fetters of being, and are completely liberated through final knowledge—
mn118:9.2 | S: There are such mendicants in this Saṅgha. | T: such bhikkhus are there in this Sangha of bhikkhus.
mn118:10.1 | S: In this Saṅgha there are mendicants who, with the ending of the five lower fetters are reborn spontaneously. They are extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. | T: “In this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who, with the destruction of the five lower fetters, are due to reappear spontaneously in the Pure Abodes and there attain final Nibbāna, without ever returning from that world—
mn118:10.2 | S: There are such mendicants in this Saṅgha. | T: such bhikkhus are there in this Sangha of bhikkhus.
mn118:11.1 | S: In this Saṅgha there are mendicants who, with the ending of three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, are once-returners. They come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering. | T: “In this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who, with the destruction of three fetters and with the attenuation of lust, hate, and delusion, are once-returners, returning once to this world to make an end of suffering—
mn118:11.2 | S: There are such mendicants in this Saṅgha. | T: such bhikkhus are there in this Sangha of bhikkhus.
mn118:12.1 | S: In this Saṅgha there are mendicants who, with the ending of three fetters are stream-enterers, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, assured, destined for awakening. | T: “In this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who, with the destruction of the three fetters, are stream-enterers, no longer subject to perdition, bound for deliverance, headed for enlightenment—
mn118:12.2 | S: There are such mendicants in this Saṅgha. | T: such bhikkhus are there in this Sangha of bhikkhus.
mn118:13.1 | S: In this Saṅgha there are mendicants who are committed to developing the four kinds of mindfulness meditation … | T: “In this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who abide devoted to the development of the four foundations of mindfulness—such bhikkhus are there in this Sangha of bhikkhus.
mn118:14.1 | S: the four right efforts … | T: In this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who abide devoted to the development of the four right kinds of striving…of the four bases for spiritual power…of the five faculties…of the five powers…of the seven enlightenment factors…of the Noble Eightfold Path—
mn118:14.2 | S: the four bases of psychic power … | T: (none)
mn118:14.3 | S: the five faculties … | T: (none)
mn118:14.4 | S: the five powers … | T: (none)
mn118:14.5 | S: the seven awakening factors … | T: (none)
mn118:14.6 | S: the noble eightfold path. | T: (none)
mn118:14.7 | S: There are such mendicants in this Saṅgha. | T: such bhikkhus are there in this Sangha of bhikkhus.
mn118:14.8 | S: In this Saṅgha there are mendicants who are committed to developing the meditation on love … | T: “In this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who abide devoted to the development of loving-kindness …of compassion…of altruistic joy…of equanimity…of the meditation on foulness…of the perception of impermanence—
mn118:14.9 | S: compassion … | T: (none)
mn118:14.10 | S: rejoicing … | T: (none)
mn118:14.11 | S: equanimity … | T: (none)
mn118:14.12 | S: ugliness … | T: (none)
mn118:14.13 | S: impermanence. | T: such bhikkhus are there in this Sangha of bhikkhus.
mn118:14.14 | S: There are such mendicants in this Saṅgha. | T: (none)
mn118:14.15 | S: In this Saṅgha there are mendicants who are committed to developing the meditation on mindfulness of breathing. | T: In this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who abide devoted to the development of mindfulness of breathing.
mn118:15.1 | S: Mendicants, when mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated it is very fruitful and beneficial. | T: Mindfulness of Breathing “Bhikkhus, when mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated, it is of great fruit and great benefit.
mn118:15.2 | S: Mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated, fulfills the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. | T: When mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated, it fulfils the four foundations of mindfulness.
mn118:15.3 | S: The four kinds of mindfulness meditation, when developed and cultivated, fulfill the seven awakening factors. | T: When the four foundations of mindfulness are developed and cultivated, they fulfil the seven enlightenment factors.
mn118:15.4 | S: And the seven awakening factors, when developed and cultivated, fulfill knowledge and freedom. | T: When the seven enlightenment factors are developed and cultivated, they fulfil true knowledge and deliverance.
mn118:16.1 | S: And how is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated to be very fruitful and beneficial? | T: “And how, bhikkhus, is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated, so that it is of great fruit and great benefit?
mn118:17.1 | S: It’s when a mendicant—gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut—sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight, and brings mindfulness to the present. | T: “Here a bhikkhu, gone to the forest or to the root of a tree or to an empty hut, sits down; having folded his legs crosswise, set his body erect, and established mindfulness in front of him,
mn118:17.2 | S: Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out. | T: ever mindful he breathes in, mindful he breathes out.
mn118:18.1 | S: Breathing in heavily they know: ‘I’m breathing in heavily.’ Breathing out heavily they know: ‘I’m breathing out heavily.’ | T: “Breathing in long, he understands: ‘I breathe in long’; or breathing out long, he understands: ‘I breathe out long.’
mn118:18.2 | S: Breathing in lightly they know: ‘I’m breathing in lightly.’ Breathing out lightly they know: ‘I’m breathing out lightly.’ | T: Breathing in short, he understands: ‘I breathe in short’; or breathing out short, he understands: ‘I breathe out short.’
mn118:18.3 | S: They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in experiencing the whole body.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out experiencing the whole body.’ | T: He trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in experiencing the whole body of breath’; he trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out experiencing the whole body of breath.’
mn118:18.4 | S: They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in stilling the physical process.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out stilling the physical process.’ | T: He trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in tranquillising the bodily formation’; he trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out tranquillising the bodily formation.’
mn118:19.1 | S: They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in experiencing rapture.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out experiencing rapture.’ | T: “He trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in experiencing rapture’; he trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out experiencing rapture.’
mn118:19.2 | S: They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in experiencing bliss.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out experiencing bliss.’ | T: He trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in experiencing pleasure’; he trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out experiencing pleasure.’
mn118:19.3 | S: They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in experiencing the mental process.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out experiencing the mental process.’ | T: He trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in experiencing the mental formation’; he trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out experiencing the mental formation.
mn118:19.4 | S: They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in stilling the mental process.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out stilling the mental process.’ | T: ’ He trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in tranquillising the mental formation’; he trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out tranquillising the mental formation.’
mn118:20.1 | S: They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in experiencing the mind.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out experiencing the mind.’ | T: “He trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in experiencing the mind’; he trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out experiencing the mind.’
mn118:20.2 | S: They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in gladdening the mind.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out gladdening the mind.’ | T: He trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in gladdening the mind’; he trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out gladdening the mind.’
mn118:20.3 | S: They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in immersing the mind in samādhi.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out immersing the mind in samādhi.’ | T: He trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in concentrating the mind’; he trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out concentrating the mind.’
mn118:20.4 | S: They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in freeing the mind.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out freeing the mind.’ | T: He trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in liberating the mind’; he trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out liberating the mind.’
mn118:21.1 | S: They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing impermanence.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing impermanence.’ | T: “He trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in contemplating impermanence’; he trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out contemplating impermanence.
mn118:21.2 | S: They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing fading away.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing fading away.’ | T: ’ He trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in contemplating fading away’; he trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out contemplating fading away.’
mn118:21.3 | S: They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing cessation.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing cessation.’ | T: He trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in contemplating cessation’; he trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out contemplating cessation.’
mn118:21.4 | S: They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe in observing letting go.’ They practice like this: ‘I’ll breathe out observing letting go.’ | T: He trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in contemplating relinquishment’; he trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out contemplating relinquishment. ’
mn118:22.1 | S: Mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated in this way, is very fruitful and beneficial. | T: “Bhikkhus, that is how mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated, so that it is of great fruit and great benefit.
mn118:23.1 | S: And how is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated so as to fulfill the four kinds of mindfulness meditation? | T: Fulfilment of the Four Foundations of Mindfulness “And how, bhikkhus, does mindfulness of breathing, developed and cultivated, fulfil the four foundations of mindfulness?
mn118:24.1 | S: Whenever a mendicant knows that they breathe heavily, | T: “Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu, breathing in long, understands: ‘I breathe in long,’ or breathing out long, understands: ‘I breathe out long’;
mn118:24.2 | S: or lightly, | T: breathing in short, understands: ‘I breathe in short,’ or breathing out short, understands: ‘I breathe out short’;
mn118:24.3 | S: or experiencing the whole body, | T: trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in experiencing the whole body of breath’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out experiencing the whole body of breath’;
mn118:24.4 | S: or stilling the physical process— | T: trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in tranquillising the bodily formation’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out tranquillising the bodily formation’—
mn118:24.5 | S: at that time they’re meditating by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. | T: on that occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
mn118:24.6 | S: For I say that the in-breaths and out-breaths are an aspect of the body. | T: I say that this is a certain body among the bodies, namely, in-breathing and out-breathing.
mn118:24.7 | S: That’s why at that time a mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. | T: That is why on that occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
mn118:25.1 | S: Whenever a mendicant practices breathing while experiencing rapture, | T: “Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in experiencing rapture’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out experiencing rapture’;
mn118:25.2 | S: or experiencing bliss, | T: trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in experiencing pleasure’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out experiencing pleasure’;
mn118:25.3 | S: or experiencing the mental process, | T: trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in experiencing the mental formation’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out experiencing the mental formation’;
mn118:25.4 | S: or stilling the mental process— | T: trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in tranquillising the mental formation’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out tranquillising the mental formation’—
mn118:25.5 | S: at that time they meditate observing an aspect of feelings—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. | T: on that occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating feelings as feelings, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
mn118:25.6 | S: For I say that careful application of mind to the in-breaths and out-breaths is an aspect of feelings. | T: I say that this is a certain feeling among the feelings, namely, giving close attention to in-breathing and out-breathing.
mn118:25.7 | S: That’s why at that time a mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of feelings—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. | T: That is why on that occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating feelings as feelings, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
mn118:26.1 | S: Whenever a mendicant practices breathing while experiencing the mind, | T: “Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in experiencing the mind’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out experiencing the mind’;
mn118:26.2 | S: or gladdening the mind, | T: trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in gladdening the mind’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out gladdening the mind’;
mn118:26.3 | S: or immersing the mind in samādhi, | T: trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in concentrating the mind’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out concentrating the mind’;
mn118:26.4 | S: or freeing the mind— | T: trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in liberating the mind’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out liberating the mind’—
mn118:26.5 | S: at that time they meditate observing an aspect of the mind—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. | T: on that occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind as mind, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
mn118:26.6 | S: There is no development of mindfulness of breathing for someone who is unmindful and lacks awareness, I say. | T: I do not say that there is the development of mindfulness of breathing for one who is forgetful, who is not fully aware.
mn118:26.7 | S: That’s why at that time a mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of the mind—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. | T: That is why on that occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind as mind, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
mn118:27.1 | S: Whenever a mendicant practices breathing while observing impermanence, | T: “Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in contemplating impermanence’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out contemplating impermanence’;
mn118:27.2 | S: or observing fading away, | T: trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in contemplating fading away’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out contemplating fading away’;
mn118:27.3 | S: or observing cessation, | T: trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in contemplating cessation’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out contemplating cessation’;
mn118:27.4 | S: or observing letting go— | T: trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in contemplating relinquishment’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out contemplating relinquishment’—
mn118:27.5 | S: at that time they meditate observing an aspect of principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. | T: on that occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
mn118:27.6 | S: Having seen with wisdom the giving up of covetousness and displeasure, they watch over closely with equanimity. | T: Having seen with wisdom the abandoning of covetousness and grief, he closely looks on with equanimity.
mn118:27.7 | S: That’s why at that time a mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. | T: That is why on that occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
mn118:28.1 | S: That’s how mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated, fulfills the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. | T: “Bhikkhus, that is how mindfulness of breathing, developed and cultivated, fulfils the four foundations of mindfulness.
mn118:29.1 | S: And how are the four kinds of mindfulness meditation developed and cultivated so as to fulfill the seven awakening factors? | T: Fulfilment of the Seven Enlightenment Factors “And how, bhikkhus, do the four foundations of mindfulness, developed and cultivated, fulfil the seven enlightenment factors?
mn118:30.1 | S: Whenever a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body, at that time their mindfulness is established and lucid. | T: “Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world—on that occasion unremitting mindfulness is established in him. On whatever occasion unremitting mindfulness is established in a bhikkhu—
mn118:30.2 | S: At such a time, a mendicant has initiated the awakening factor of mindfulness; they develop it and perfect it. | T: on that occasion the mindfulness enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development, it comes to fulfilment in him.
mn118:31.1 | S: As they live mindfully in this way they investigate, explore, and inquire into that principle with wisdom. | T: “Abiding thus mindful, he investigates and examines that state with wisdom and embarks upon a full inquiry into it.
mn118:31.2 | S: At such a time, a mendicant has initiated the awakening factor of investigation of principles; they develop it and perfect it. | T: On whatever occasion, abiding thus mindful, a bhikkhu investigates and examines that state with wisdom and embarks upon a full inquiry into it—on that occasion the investigation-of-states enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.
mn118:32.1 | S: As they investigate principles with wisdom in this way their energy is roused up and unflagging. | T: “In one who investigates and examines that state with wisdom and embarks upon a full inquiry into it, tireless energy is aroused. On whatever occasion tireless energy is aroused in a bhikkhu who investigates and examines that state with wisdom and embarks upon a full inquiry into it—
mn118:32.2 | S: At such a time, a mendicant has initiated the awakening factor of energy; they develop it and perfect it. | T: on that occasion the energy enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.
mn118:33.1 | S: When they’re energetic, rapture not of the flesh arises. | T: “In one who has aroused energy, unworldly rapture arises. On whatever occasion unworldly rapture arises in a bhikkhu who has aroused energy—
mn118:33.2 | S: At such a time, a mendicant has initiated the awakening factor of rapture; they develop it and perfect it. | T: on that occasion the rapture enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.
mn118:34.1 | S: When the mind is full of rapture, the body and mind become tranquil. | T: “In one who is rapturous, the body and the mind become tranquil. On whatever occasion the body and the mind become tranquil in a bhikkhu who is rapturous—
mn118:34.2 | S: At such a time, a mendicant has initiated the awakening factor of tranquility; they develop it and perfect it. | T: on that occasion the tranquillity enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.
mn118:35.1 | S: When the body is tranquil and they feel bliss, the mind becomes immersed in samādhi. | T: “In one whose body is tranquil and who feels pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated. On whatever occasion the mind becomes concentrated in a bhikkhu whose body is tranquil and who feels pleasure—
mn118:35.2 | S: At such a time, a mendicant has initiated the awakening factor of immersion; they develop it and perfect it. | T: on that occasion the concentration enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.
mn118:36.1 | S: They closely watch over that mind immersed in samādhi. | T: “He closely looks on with equanimity at the mind thus concentrated. On whatever occasion a bhikkhu closely looks on with equanimity at the mind thus concentrated—
mn118:36.2 | S: At such a time, a mendicant has initiated the awakening factor of equanimity; they develop it and perfect it. | T: on that occasion the equanimity enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.
mn118:37.1 | S: Whenever a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of feelings … | T: “Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating feelings as feelings,
mn118:38.1 | S: mind … | T: (none)
mn118:38.2 | S: principles, at that time their mindfulness is established and lucid. | T: ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world…repeat as at §§30–
mn118:38.3 | S: At such a time, a mendicant has initiated the awakening factor of mindfulness … | T: 36…the equanimity enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him. “Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind as mind, ardent, fully aware, and mindful,
mn118:38.5 | S: investigation of principles … | T: having put away covetousness and grief for the world…repeat as at §§30–36…the equanimity enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.
mn118:38.7 | S: energy … | T: “Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world…repeat as at §§30–
mn118:38.9 | S: rapture … | T: 36…
mn118:38.11 | S: tranquility … | T: …the equanimity enlightenment factor is aroused in him,
mn118:38.13 | S: immersion … | T: (none)
mn118:39.2 | S: equanimity. | T: and he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.
mn118:40.1 | S: That’s how the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, when developed and cultivated, fulfill the seven awakening factors. | T: “Bhikkhus, that is how the four foundations of mindfulness, developed and cultivated, fulfil the seven enlightenment factors.
mn118:41.1 | S: And how are the seven awakening factors developed and cultivated so as to fulfill knowledge and freedom? | T: Fulfilment of True Knowledge and Deliverance “And how, bhikkhus, do the seven enlightenment factors, developed and cultivated, fulfil true knowledge and deliverance?
mn118:42.1 | S: It’s when a mendicant develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, | T: “Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu develops the mindfulness enlightenment factor,
mn118:42.2 | S: investigation of principles, | T: (none)
mn118:42.3 | S: energy, | T: (none)
mn118:42.4 | S: rapture, | T: (none)
mn118:42.5 | S: tranquility, | T: (none)
mn118:42.6 | S: immersion, | T: (none)
mn118:42.7 | S: and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. | T: which is supported by seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, and ripens in relinquishment. He develops the investigation-of-states enlightenment factor…the energy enlightenment factor…the rapture enlightenment factor…the tranquillity enlightenment factor…the concentration enlightenment factor…the equanimity enlightenment factor, which is supported by seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, and ripens in relinquishment.
mn118:43.1 | S: That’s how the seven awakening factors, when developed and cultivated, fulfill knowledge and freedom.” | T: “Bhikkhus, that is how the seven enlightenment factors, developed and cultivated, fulfil true knowledge and deliverance.”
mn118:43.2 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: That is what the Blessed One said.
mn118:43.3 | S: Satisfied, the monks approved what the Buddha said. | T: The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.

## an4.29
an4.29:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, these four footprints of the Dhamma are primordial, long-standing, customary, and traditional. They are uncorrupted, as they have been since the beginning. They’re not being corrupted now nor will they be. Sensible ascetics and brahmins don’t look down on them. | T: “Bhikkhus, there are these four Dhamma factors, primal, of long standing, traditional, ancient, unadulterated and never before adulterated, which are not being adulterated and will not be adulterated, which are not repudiated by wise ascetics and brahmins. What four? (1) “Non-longing is a Dhamma factor, primal, of long standing, traditional, ancient, unadulterated and never before adulterated, which is not being adulterated and will not be adulterated, which is not repudiated by wise ascetics and brahmins. (2) Good will is a Dhamma factor, primal, of long standing …
an4.29:1.2 | S: What four? | T: (none)
an4.29:1.3 | S: Contentment, good will, right mindfulness, and right immersion. | T: (3) Right mindfulness is a Dhamma factor, primal, of long standing … (4) Right concentration is a Dhamma factor,
an4.29:4.2 | S: These four footprints of the Dhamma are primordial, long-standing, customary, and traditional. They are uncorrupted, as they have been since the beginning. They’re not being corrupted now nor will they be. Sensible ascetics and brahmins don’t look down on them. | T: primal, of long standing … not repudiated by wise ascetics and brahmins. “These are the four Dhamma factors, primal, of long standing, traditional, ancient, unadulterated and never before adulterated, which are not being adulterated and will not be adulterated, which are not repudiated by wise ascetics and brahmins.”
an4.29:5.1 | S: You should live with contentment, | T: One should dwell free from longing
an4.29:5.2 | S: and a heart of good will, | T: with a heart of good will.
an4.29:5.3 | S: mindful, with unified mind, | T: One should be mindful and one-pointed in mind,
an4.29:5.4 | S: serene within.” | T: internally well concentrated.

## an4.39
an4.39:1.1 | S: Then Ujjaya the brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. | T: Then the brahmin Ujjaya approached the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him.
an4.39:1.2 | S: When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha: | T: When they had concluded their greetings and cordial talk, he sat down to one side and said to the Blessed One:
an4.39:1.3 | S: “Does the worthy Gotama praise sacrifice?” | T: “Does Master Gotama praise sacrifice?”
an4.39:1.4 | S: “Brahmin, I don’t praise all sacrifices. | T: “I do not praise all sacrifice, brahmin, nor do I withhold praise from all sacrifice.
an4.39:1.5 | S: Nor do I criticize all sacrifices. | T: (none)
an4.39:1.6 | S: Take the kind of sacrifice where cattle, goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, and various kinds of creatures are slaughtered. | T: (1) I do not praise a violent sacrifice at which cattle, goats, rams, chickens, and pigs are slain, at which various creatures are led to slaughter.
an4.39:1.7 | S: I don’t praise that kind of violent sacrifice. | T: (2) For what reason?
an4.39:1.8 | S: Why is that? | T: (none)
an4.39:1.9 | S: Because neither perfected ones nor those who are on the path to perfection will attend such a violent sacrifice. | T: Because arahants and those who have entered the path to arahantship do not attend a violent sacrifice.
an4.39:2.1 | S: But take the kind of sacrifice where cattle, goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, and various kinds of creatures are not slaughtered. | T: (3) “But I praise a non-violent sacrifice at which cattle, goats, rams, chickens, and pigs are not slain, where various creatures are not slaughtered,
an4.39:2.2 | S: I do praise that kind of non-violent sacrifice; for example, a regular gift as a propitious sacrifice. | T: that is, a regular giving, a sacrifice offered by family custom.
an4.39:2.3 | S: Why is that? | T: (4) For what reason?
an4.39:2.4 | S: Because perfected ones and those who are on the path to perfection will attend such a non-violent sacrifice. | T: Because arahants and those who have entered the path to arahantship attend a nonviolent sacrifice.”
an4.39:3.1 | S: Horse sacrifice, human sacrifice, | T: The horse sacrifice, human sacrifice,
an4.39:3.2 | S: the sacrifices of the ‘casting of the yoke-pin’, | T: sammāpāsa, vājapeyya, niraggaḷa:
an4.39:3.3 | S: the ‘royal soma drinking’, and the ‘unbarred’— | T: (none)
an4.39:3.4 | S: these grand, violent sacrifices yield no great fruit. | T: these grand sacrifices, fraught with violence, do not bring great fruit.
an4.39:4.1 | S: The great sages of right comportment | T: The great seers of right conduct
an4.39:4.2 | S: don’t attend sacrifices | T: do not attend a sacrifice
an4.39:4.3 | S: where goats, sheep, and cattle, | T: where goats, rams, cattle,
an4.39:4.4 | S: and various creatures are killed. | T: and various creatures are slain.
an4.39:5.1 | S: But the great sages of right comportment | T: (none)
an4.39:5.2 | S: do attend those sacrifices | T: But when they regularly offer by family custom
an4.39:5.3 | S: that are non-violent and propitious, | T: sacrifices free from violence,
an4.39:5.4 | S: where goats, sheep, and cattle, | T: no goats, sheep, and cattle
an4.39:5.5 | S: and various creatures are not killed. | T: or various creatures are slain.
an4.39:5.6 | P: upayanti mahesino. | T: That is the sacrifice the great seers of right conduct attend.
an4.39:6.1 | S: An intelligent person should sacrifice like this, | T: The wise person should offer this;
an4.39:6.2 | S: for this sacrifice is very fruitful. | T: this sacrifice is very fruitful.
an4.39:6.3 | S: For a sponsor of sacrifices like this, | T: For one who makes such sacrifice
an4.39:6.4 | S: things get better, not worse. | T: it is indeed better, never worse.
an4.39:6.5 | S: Such a sacrifice is truly abundant, | T: Such a sacrifice is truly vast
an4.39:6.6 | S: and even the deities are pleased.” | T: and the deities too are pleased.

## an5.23
an5.23:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, there are these five corruptions of native gold. When native gold is corrupted by these it’s not pliable, workable, or radiant, but is brittle and not completely ready for working. | T: “Bhikkhus, there are these five defilements of gold, defiled by which gold is not malleable, wieldy, and luminous, but brittle and not properly fit for work.
an5.23:1.2 | S: What five? | T: What five?
an5.23:1.3 | S: Iron, copper, tin, lead, and silver. | T: Iron, copper, tin, lead, and silver.
an5.23:1.4 | S: When native gold is corrupted by these five corruptions it’s not pliable, workable, or radiant, but is brittle and not completely ready for working. | T: These are the five defilements of gold, defiled by which gold is not malleable, wieldy, and luminous, but brittle and not properly fit for work.
an5.23:1.5 | S: But when native gold is free of these five corruptions it becomes pliable, workable, and radiant, not brittle, and ready to be worked. | T: But when gold is freed from these five defilements, it is malleable, wieldy, and luminous, pliant and properly fit for work.
an5.23:1.6 | S: Then the goldsmith can successfully create any kind of ornament they want, whether a ring, earrings, a necklace, or a golden garland. | T: Then whatever kind of ornament one wishes to make from it—whether a bracelet, earrings, a necklace, or a golden garland—one can achieve one’s purpose.
an5.23:2.1 | S: In the same way, there are these five corruptions of the mind. When the mind is corrupted by these it’s not pliable, workable, or radiant. It’s brittle, and not rightly immersed in samādhi for the ending of defilements. | T: “So too, bhikkhus, there are these five defilements of the mind, defiled by which the mind is not malleable, wieldy, and luminous, but brittle and not properly concentrated for the destruction of the taints.
an5.23:2.2 | S: What five? | T: What five?
an5.23:2.3 | S: Sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. | T: Sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt.
an5.23:2.4 | S: These are the five corruptions of the mind. When the mind is corrupted by these it’s not pliable, workable, or radiant. It’s brittle, and not rightly immersed in samādhi for the ending of defilements. | T: These are the five defilements of the mind, defiled by which the mind is not malleable, wieldy, and luminous, but brittle and not properly concentrated for the destruction of the taints.
an5.23:2.5 | S: But when the mind is free of these five corruptions it’s pliable, workable, and radiant. It’s not brittle, and is rightly immersed in samādhi for the ending of defilements. | T: But when the mind is freed from these five defilements, it becomes malleable, wieldy, and luminous, pliant and properly concentrated for the destruction of the taints.
an5.23:2.6 | S: You extend your mind to realize by insight each and every thing that can be realized by insight; and you are capable of realizing those things, since each and every one is within range. | T: Then, there being a suitable basis, one is capable of realizing any state realizable by direct knowledge toward which one might incline the mind.
an5.23:3.1 | S: If you wish: ‘May I wield the many kinds of psychic power—multiplying myself and becoming one again; materializing and dematerializing; going unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful, controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity.’ | T: “If one wishes: ‘May I wield the various kinds of psychic potency: having been one, may I become many; having been many, may I become one; may I appear and vanish; may I go unhindered through a wall, through a rampart, through a mountain as though through space; may I dive in and out of the earth as though it were water; may I walk on water without sinking as though it were earth; seated cross-legged, may I travel in space like a bird; with my hand may I touch and stroke the moon and sun so powerful and mighty; may I exercise mastery with the body as far as the brahmā world,’
an5.23:3.2 | S: You’re capable of realizing it, since each and every one is within range. | T: one is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.
an5.23:4.1 | S: If you wish: ‘With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, may I hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far.’ | T: “If one wishes: ‘May I, with the divine ear element, which is purified and surpasses the human, hear both kinds of sounds, the divine and human, those that are far as well as near,’
an5.23:4.2 | S: You’re capable of realizing it, since each and every one is within range. | T: one is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.
an5.23:5.1 | S: If you wish: ‘May I understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having encompassed them with my mind. | T: “If one wishes: ‘May I understand the minds of other beings and persons, having encompassed them with my own mind.
an5.23:5.2 | S: May I understand mind with greed as “mind with greed”, | T: May I understand a mind with lust as a mind with lust,
an5.23:5.3 | S: and mind without greed as “mind without greed”; | T: and a mind without lust as a mind without lust;
an5.23:5.4 | S: mind with hate as “mind with hate”, | T: a mind with hatred as a mind with hatred,
an5.23:5.5 | S: and mind without hate as “mind without hate”; | T: and a mind without hatred as a mind without hatred;
an5.23:5.6 | S: mind with delusion as “mind with delusion”, | T: a mind with delusion as a mind with delusion,
an5.23:5.7 | S: and mind without delusion as “mind without delusion”; | T: and a mind without delusion as a mind without delusion;
an5.23:5.8 | S: constricted mind as “constricted mind”, | T: a contracted mind as contracted and a distracted mind as distracted;
an5.23:5.9 | S: and scattered mind as “scattered mind”; | T: (none)
an5.23:5.10 | S: expansive mind as “expansive mind”, | T: an exalted mind as exalted and an unexalted mind as unexalted;
an5.23:5.11 | S: and unexpansive mind as “unexpansive mind”; | T: (none)
an5.23:5.12 | S: mind that is not supreme as “mind that is not supreme”, | T: a surpassable mind as surpassable and an unsurpassable mind as unsurpassable;
an5.23:5.13 | S: and mind that is supreme as “mind that is supreme”; | T: (none)
an5.23:5.14 | S: mind immersed in samādhi as “mind immersed in samādhi”, | T: (none)
an5.23:5.15 | S: and mind not immersed in samādhi as “mind not immersed in samādhi”; | T: a concentrated mind as concentrated and an unconcentrated mind as unconcentrated;
an5.23:5.16 | S: freed mind as “freed mind”, | T: a liberated mind as liberated and an unliberated mind as unliberated,’
an5.23:5.17 | S: and unfreed mind as “unfreed mind”.’ | T: (none)
an5.23:5.18 | S: You’re capable of realizing it, since each and every one is within range. | T: one is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.
an5.23:6.1 | S: If you wish: ‘May I recollect many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. May I remember: “There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.” May I recollect my many past lives, with features and details.’ | T: “If one wishes: ‘May I recollect my manifold past abodes, that is, one birth, two births, three births, four births, five births, ten births, twenty births, thirty births, forty births, fifty births, a hundred births, a thousand births, a hundred thousand births, many eons of world-dissolution, many eons of world-evolution, many eons of world-dissolution and world-evolution thus: “There I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life span; passing away from there, I was reborn elsewhere, and there too I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life span; passing away from there, I was reborn here”—may I thus recollect my manifold past abodes with their aspects and details,’
an5.23:6.2 | S: You’re capable of realizing it, since each and every one is within range. | T: one is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.
an5.23:7.1 | S: If you wish: ‘With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, may I see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place—and understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds: “These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.” And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, may I see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. And may I understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds.’ | T: “If one wishes: ‘May I, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, see beings passing away and being reborn, inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and understand how beings fare in accordance with their kamma thus: “These beings who engaged in misconduct by body, speech, and mind, who reviled the noble ones, held wrong view, and undertook kamma based on wrong view, with the breakup of the body, after death, have been reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell; but these beings who engaged in good conduct by body, speech, and mind, who did not revile the noble ones, who held right view, and undertook kamma based on right view, with the breakup of the body, after death, have been reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world”—thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, may I see beings passing away and being reborn, inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and understand how beings fare in accordance with their kamma,’
an5.23:7.2 | S: You’re capable of realizing it, since each and every one is within range. | T: one is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.
an5.23:8.1 | S: If you wish: ‘May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, and live having realized it with my own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements.’ | T: “If one wishes: ‘May I, with the destruction of the taints, in this very life realize for myself with direct knowledge the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, may I dwell in it,’
an5.23:8.2 | S: You’re capable of realizing it, since each and every one is within range.” | T: one is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.”

## an8.37
an8.37:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, there are these eight gifts of a true person. | T: “Bhikkhus, there are these eight gifts of a good person.
an8.37:1.2 | S: What eight? | T: What eight?
an8.37:1.3 | S: Their gift is pure, good quality, timely, appropriate, intelligent, and regular. While giving their heart is confident, and afterwards they’re uplifted. | T: (1) He gives what is pure; (2) he gives what is excellent; (3) he gives a timely gift; (4) he gives what is allowable; (5) he gives after investigation; (6) he gives often; (7) while giving he settles his mind in confidence; and (8) having given, he is elated.
an8.37:1.4 | S: These are the eight gifts of a true person. | T: These are the eight gifts of a good person.”
an8.37:2.1 | S: He gives pure, good quality, and timely gifts | T: He gives what is pure and excellent,
an8.37:2.2 | S: of appropriate food and drinks | T: allowable drinks and food at the proper time;
an8.37:2.3 | S: regularly to spiritual practitioners | T: (none)
an8.37:2.4 | S: who are fertile fields of merit. | T: he gives gifts often to fertile fields of merit, to those who lead the spiritual life.
an8.37:3.1 | S: They never regret | T: He does not feel regret,
an8.37:3.2 | S: giving away many things of the flesh. | T: having given away many material things.
an8.37:3.3 | S: Discerning people praise | T: Those with deep insight praise
an8.37:3.4 | S: giving such gifts. | T: the gifts given in this way.
an8.37:4.1 | S: An intelligent person sacrifices like this, | T: Having thus practiced charity
an8.37:4.2 | S: faithful, with a mind of letting go. | T: with a mind freely generous, one intelligent and wise, rich in faith,
an8.37:4.3 | S: Such an astute person is reborn | T: is reborn in a pleasant, unafflicted world.
an8.37:4.4 | S: in a happy, pleasing world.” | T: (none)

