## mn77, continued
mn77:10.2 | S: What five? | T: What are the five?
mn77:10.3 | S: Firstly, my disciples esteem me for the higher ethics: | T: i. The Higher Virtue “Here, Udāyin, my disciples esteem me for the higher virtue thus:
mn77:10.4 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama is ethical. He possesses the entire spectrum of ethical conduct to the highest degree.’ | T: ‘The recluse Gotama is virtuous, he possesses the supreme aggregate of virtue.’
mn77:11.1 | S: Since this is so, | T: (none)
mn77:11.2 | S: this is the first quality because of which my disciples are loyal to me. | T: This is the first quality because of which my disciples honour, respect, revere, and venerate me, and live in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me.
mn77:12.1 | S: Furthermore, my disciples esteem me for my excellent knowledge and vision: | T: ii. Knowledge and Vision “Again, Udāyin, my disciples esteem me for my excellent knowledge and vision thus:
mn77:12.2 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama only claims to know when he does in fact know. | T: ‘When the recluse Gotama says “I know,” he truly knows;
mn77:12.3 | S: He only claims to see when he really does see. | T: when he says “I see,” he truly sees.
mn77:12.4 | S: He teaches based on direct knowledge, not without direct knowledge. | T: The recluse Gotama teaches the Dhamma through direct knowledge, not without direct knowledge;
mn77:12.5 | S: He teaches based on reason, not without reason. | T: (none)
mn77:12.6 | S: He teaches with a demonstrable basis, not without it.’ | T: he teaches the Dhamma with a sound basis, not without a sound basis; he teaches the Dhamma in a convincing manner,
mn77:12.7 | S: Since this is so, | T: (none)
mn77:12.11 | P: sanidānaṁ samaṇo gotamo dhammaṁ deseti no anidānaṁ; | T: not in an unconvincing manner.’
mn77:12.12 | S: this is the second quality because of which my disciples are loyal to me. | T: This is the second quality because of which my disciples honour me…
mn77:13.1 | S: Furthermore, my disciples esteem me for my higher wisdom: | T: iii. The Higher Wisdom “Again, Udāyin, my disciples esteem me for the higher wisdom thus:
mn77:13.2 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama is wise. He possesses the entire spectrum of wisdom to the highest degree. | T: ‘The recluse Gotama is wise; he possesses the supreme aggregate of wisdom.
mn77:13.3 | S: It’s not possible that he would fail to foresee grounds for future criticism, or to legitimately and completely refute the doctrines of others that come up.’ | T: It is impossible that he should not foresee the implications of an assertion or that he should not be able to confute with reasons the current doctrines of others.’
mn77:13.4 | S: What do you think, Udāyī? | T: What do you think, Udāyin?
mn77:13.5 | S: Would my disciples, knowing and seeing this, break in and interrupt me?” | T: Would my disciples, knowing and seeing thus, break in and interrupt me?”—“No,
mn77:13.6 | S: “No, sir.” | T: venerable sir.”—
mn77:13.7 | S: “That’s because I don’t expect to be instructed by my disciples. | T: (none)
mn77:13.8 | S: Invariably, my disciples expect instruction from me. | T: “I do not expect instruction from my disciples; invariably, it is my disciples who expect instruction from me.
mn77:13.9 | S: Since this is so, | T: (none)
mn77:13.13 | S: this is the third quality because of which my disciples are loyal to me. | T: This is the third quality because of which my disciples honour me…
mn77:14.1 | S: Furthermore, my disciples come to me and ask how the noble truth of suffering applies to the suffering in which they are swamped and mired. And I provide them with a satisfying answer to their question. | T: iv. The Four Noble Truths “Again, Udāyin, when my disciples have met with suffering and become victims of suffering, prey to suffering, they come to me and ask me about the noble truth of suffering. Being asked, I explain to them the noble truth of suffering, and I satisfy their minds with my explanation.
mn77:14.2 | S: They ask how the noble truths of the origin of suffering, | T: They ask me about the noble truth of the origin of suffering…about the noble truth of the cessation of suffering…about the noble truth of the way leading to the cessation of suffering.
mn77:14.3 | S: the cessation of suffering, | T: (none)
mn77:14.4 | S: and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering apply to the suffering  in which they are swamped and mired. And I provide them with satisfying answers to their questions. | T: Being asked, I explain to them the noble truth of the way leading to the cessation of suffering, and I satisfy their minds with my explanation.
mn77:14.5 | S: Since this is so, | T: (none)
mn77:14.11 | S: this is the fourth quality because of which my disciples are loyal to me. | T: This is the fourth quality because of which my disciples honour me…
mn77:15.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. | T: V. The Way to Develop Wholesome States 1. The Four Foundations of Mindfulness “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the four foundations of mindfulness.
mn77:15.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. | T: Here a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
mn77:15.3 | S: They meditate observing an aspect of feelings … | T: He abides contemplating feelings as feelings…He abides contemplating mind as mind…He abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects,
mn77:15.4 | S: mind … | T: (none)
mn77:15.5 | S: principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. | T: ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
mn77:15.6 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:16.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the four right efforts. | T: 2. The Four Right Kinds of Striving “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the four right kinds of striving.
mn77:16.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities don’t arise. | T: Here a bhikkhu awakens zeal for the non-arising of unarisen evil unwholesome states, and he makes effort, arouses energy, exerts his mind, and strives.
mn77:16.3 | S: They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up. | T: He awakens zeal for the abandoning of arisen evil unwholesome states…He awakens zeal for the arising of unarisen wholesome states…He awakens zeal for the continuance,
mn77:16.4 | S: They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities arise. | T: (none)
mn77:16.5 | S: They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are fully developed. | T: non-disappearance, strengthening, increase, and fulfilment by development of arisen wholesome states, and he makes effort, arouses energy, exerts his mind, and strives.
mn77:16.6 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:17.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the four bases of psychic power. | T: 3. The Four Bases for Spiritual Power “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the four bases for spiritual power.
mn77:17.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort. | T: Here a bhikkhu develops the basis for spiritual power consisting in concentration due to zeal and determined striving.
mn77:17.3 | S: They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy, and active effort. | T: He develops the basis for spiritual power consisting in concentration due to energy and determined striving.
mn77:17.4 | S: They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to mental development, and active effort. | T: He develops the basis for spiritual power consisting in concentration due to purity of mind and determined striving.
mn77:17.5 | S: They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to inquiry, and active effort. | T: He develops the basis for spiritual power consisting in concentration due to investigation and determined striving.
mn77:17.6 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:18.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the five faculties. | T: 4. The Five Faculties “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the five spiritual faculties. Here a bhikkhu develops the faculty of faith, which leads to peace, leads to enlightenment.
mn77:18.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant develops the faculties of faith, | T: He develops the faculty of energy…the faculty of mindfulness…
mn77:18.3 | S: energy, | T: (none)
mn77:18.4 | S: mindfulness, | T: (none)
mn77:18.5 | S: immersion, | T: (none)
mn77:18.6 | S: and wisdom, which lead to peace and awakening. | T: the faculty of concentration…the faculty of wisdom, which leads to peace, leads to enlightenment.
mn77:18.7 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:19.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the five powers. | T: 5. The Five Powers “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the five powers. Here a bhikkhu develops the power of faith, which leads to peace, leads to enlightenment.
mn77:19.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant develops the powers of faith, | T: He develops the power of energy…the power of mindfulness…the power of concentration…the power of wisdom,
mn77:19.3 | S: energy, | T: (none)
mn77:19.4 | S: mindfulness, | T: (none)
mn77:19.5 | S: immersion, | T: (none)
mn77:19.6 | S: and wisdom, which lead to peace and awakening. | T: which leads to peace, leads to enlightenment.
mn77:19.7 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:20.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the seven awakening factors. | T: 6. The Seven Enlightenment Factors “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the seven enlightenment factors. Here a bhikkhu develops the mindfulness enlightenment factor, which is supported by seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, and results in relinquishment.
mn77:20.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, | T: He develops the investigation-of-states enlightenment factor…the energy enlightenment factor…the rapture enlightenment factor…the tranquillity enlightenment factor…
mn77:20.3 | S: investigation of principles, | T: (none)
mn77:20.4 | S: energy, | T: (none)
mn77:20.5 | S: rapture, | T: the concentration enlightenment factor…the equanimity enlightenment factor,
mn77:20.6 | S: tranquility, | T: (none)
mn77:20.7 | S: immersion, | T: (none)
mn77:20.8 | S: and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. | T: which is supported by seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, and results in relinquishment.
mn77:20.9 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:21.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the noble eightfold path. | T: 7. The Noble Eightfold Path “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the Noble Eightfold Path.
mn77:21.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant develops right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. | T: Here a bhikkhu develops right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
mn77:21.3 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:22.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the eight liberations. | T: 8. The Eight Liberations “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the eight liberations.
mn77:22.2 | S: Having physical form, they see forms. | T: Possessed of material form, one sees forms:
mn77:22.3 | S: This is the first liberation. | T: this is the first liberation.
mn77:22.4 | S: Not perceiving form internally, they see forms externally. | T: Not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally:
mn77:22.5 | S: This is the second liberation. | T: this is the second liberation.
mn77:22.6 | S: They’re focused only on beauty. | T: One is resolved only upon the beautiful:
mn77:22.7 | S: This is the third liberation. | T: this is the third liberation.
mn77:22.8 | S: Going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite’, they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite space. | T: With the complete surmounting of perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of sensory impact, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite,’ one enters upon and abides in the base of infinite space:
mn77:22.9 | S: This is the fourth liberation. | T: this is the fourth liberation.
mn77:22.10 | S: Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite’, they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite consciousness. | T: By completely surmounting the base of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite,’ one enters upon and abides in the base of infinite consciousness:
mn77:22.11 | S: This is the fifth liberation. | T: this is the fifth liberation.
mn77:22.12 | S: Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing at all’, they enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness. | T: By completely surmounting the base of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing,’ one enters upon and abides in the base of nothingness:
mn77:22.13 | S: This is the sixth liberation. | T: this is the sixth liberation.
mn77:22.14 | S: Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. | T: By completely surmounting the base of nothingness, one enters upon and abides in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception:
mn77:22.15 | S: This is the seventh liberation. | T: this is the seventh liberation.
mn77:22.16 | S: Going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception and feeling. | T: By completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, one enters upon and abides in the cessation of perception and feeling:
mn77:22.17 | S: This is the eighth liberation. | T: this is the eighth liberation.
mn77:22.18 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:23.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the eight dimensions of mastery. | T: 9. The Eight Bases for Transcendence “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the eight bases for transcendence.
mn77:23.2 | S: Perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limited, both pretty and ugly. | T: Perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally, limited, fair and ugly;
mn77:23.3 | S: Mastering them, they perceive: ‘I know and see.’ | T: by transcending them, one perceives thus: ‘I know, I see.’
mn77:23.4 | S: This is the first dimension of mastery. | T: This is the first base for transcendence .
mn77:23.5 | S: Perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limitless, both pretty and ugly. | T: Perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally, immeasurable, fair and ugly;
mn77:23.6 | S: Mastering them, they perceive: ‘I know and see.’ | T: by transcending them, one perceives thus: ‘I know, I see.’
mn77:23.7 | S: This is the second dimension of mastery. | T: This is the second base for transcendence.
mn77:23.8 | S: Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limited, both pretty and ugly. | T: Not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally, limited, fair and ugly;
mn77:23.9 | S: Mastering them, they perceive: ‘I know and see.’ | T: by transcending them, one perceives thus: ‘I know, I see.’
mn77:23.10 | S: This is the third dimension of mastery. | T: This is the third base for transcendence .
mn77:23.11 | S: Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limitless, both pretty and ugly. | T: Not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally, immeasurable, fair and ugly;
mn77:23.12 | S: Mastering them, they perceive: ‘I know and see.’ | T: by transcending them, one perceives thus: ‘I know, I see.’
mn77:23.13 | S: This is the fourth dimension of mastery. | T: This is the fourth base for transcendence.
mn77:23.14 | S: Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, blue, with blue color and blue appearance. | T: Not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally, blue, of blue colour, blue in appearance, with blue luminosity.
mn77:23.15 | S: They’re like a flax flower that’s blue, with blue color and blue appearance. Or a cloth from Varanasi that’s smoothed on both sides, blue, with blue color and blue appearance. | T: Just like a flax flower, which is blue, of blue colour, blue in appearance, with blue luminosity, or just like Benares cloth smoothened on both sides, which is blue, of blue colour, blue in appearance, with blue luminosity;
mn77:23.16 | S: In the same way, not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, blue, with blue color and blue appearance. | T: so too, not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally…with blue luminosity;
mn77:23.17 | S: Mastering them, they perceive: ‘I know and see.’ | T: by transcending them, one perceives thus: ‘I know, I see.’
mn77:23.18 | S: This is the fifth dimension of mastery. | T: This is the fifth base for transcendence.
mn77:23.19 | S: Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance. | T: Not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally, yellow, of yellow colour, yellow in appearance, with yellow luminosity.
mn77:23.20 | S: They’re like a champak flower that’s yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance. Or a cloth from Varanasi that’s smoothed on both sides, yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance. | T: Just like a kaṇṇikāra flower, which is yellow, of yellow colour, yellow in appearance, with yellow luminosity, or just like Benares cloth smoothened on both sides, which is yellow, of yellow colour, yellow in appearance, with yellow luminosity;
mn77:23.21 | S: In the same way, not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance. | T: so too, not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally…with yellow luminosity;
mn77:23.22 | S: Mastering them, they perceive: ‘I know and see.’ | T: by transcending them, one perceives thus: ‘I know, I see.’
mn77:23.23 | S: This is the sixth dimension of mastery. | T: This is the sixth base for transcendence.
mn77:23.24 | S: Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are red, with red color and red appearance. | T: Not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally, red, of red colour, red in appearance, with red luminosity.
mn77:23.25 | S: They’re like a scarlet mallow flower that’s red, with red color and red appearance. Or a cloth from Varanasi that’s smoothed on both sides, red, with red color and red appearance. | T: Just like a hibiscus flower, which is red, of red colour, red in appearance, with red luminosity, or just like Benares cloth smoothened on both sides, which is red, of red colour, red in appearance,
mn77:23.26 | S: In the same way, not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are red, with red color and red appearance. | T: with red luminosity; so too, not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally…with red luminosity;
mn77:23.27 | S: Mastering them, they perceive: ‘I know and see.’ | T: by transcending them, one perceives thus: ‘I know, I see.’
mn77:23.28 | S: This is the seventh dimension of mastery. | T: This is the seventh base for transcendence.
mn77:23.29 | S: Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are white, with white color and white appearance. | T: Not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally, white, of white colour, white in appearance, with white luminosity.
mn77:23.30 | S: They’re like the morning star that’s white, with white color and white appearance. Or a cloth from Varanasi that’s smoothed on both sides, white, with white color and white appearance. | T: Just like the morning star, which is white, of white colour, white in appearance, with white luminosity, or just like Benares cloth smoothened on both sides, which is white, of white colour, white in appearance, with white luminosity;
mn77:23.31 | S: In the same way, not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are white, with white color and white appearance. | T: so too, not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally…with white luminosity;
mn77:23.32 | S: Mastering them, they perceive: ‘I know and see.’ | T: by transcending them, one perceives thus: ‘I know, I see.’
mn77:23.33 | S: This is the eighth dimension of mastery. | T: This is the eighth base for transcendence.
mn77:23.34 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:24.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the ten universal dimensions of meditation. | T: 10. The Ten Kasiṇas “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the ten kasiṇa bases.
mn77:24.2 | S: Someone perceives the meditation on universal earth above, below, across, undivided and limitless. | T: One contemplates the earthkasiṇa above, below, and across, undivided and immeasurable.
mn77:24.3 | S: They perceive the meditation on universal water … | T: (none)
mn77:24.4 | S: the meditation on universal fire … | T: Another contemplates the water-kasiṇa…Another contemplates the fire-kasiṇa…Another contemplates the air-kasiṇa…Another contemplates the blue-kasiṇa…Another contemplates the yellow-kasiṇa…Another contemplates the red-kasiṇa…Another contemplates the white-kasiṇa…Another contemplates the space-kasiṇa…Another contemplates the consciousness-kasiṇa above,
mn77:24.5 | S: the meditation on universal air … | T: (none)
mn77:24.6 | S: the meditation on universal blue … | T: (none)
mn77:24.7 | S: the meditation on universal yellow … | T: (none)
mn77:24.8 | S: the meditation on universal red … | T: (none)
mn77:24.9 | S: the meditation on universal white … | T: (none)
mn77:24.10 | S: the meditation on universal space … | T: (none)
mn77:24.11 | S: the meditation on universal consciousness above, below, across, undivided and limitless. | T: below, and across, undivided and immeasurable.
mn77:24.12 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the perfection and consummation of direct knowledge.
mn77:25.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to develop the four absorptions. | T: 11. The Four Jhānas “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the four jhānas.
mn77:25.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: Here, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
mn77:25.3 | S: They drench, steep, fill, and spread themselves with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. | T: He makes the rapture and pleasure born of seclusion drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
mn77:25.4 | S: It’s like when a deft bathroom attendant or their apprentice pours bath powder into a bronze dish, sprinkling it little by little with water. They knead it until the ball of bath powder is soaked and saturated with moisture, spread through inside and out; yet no moisture oozes out. | T: Just as a skilled bath man or a bath man’s apprentice heaps bath powder in a metal basin and, sprinkling it gradually with water, kneads it till the moisture wets his ball of bath powder, soaks it and pervades it inside and out, yet the ball itself does not ooze;
mn77:25.5 | S: In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads themselves with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. | T: so too, a bhikkhu makes the rapture and pleasure born of seclusion drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
mn77:26.1 | S: Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: “Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second jhāna, which has self-confidence and singleness of mind without applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of concentration.
mn77:26.2 | S: They drench, steep, fill, and spread themselves with rapture and bliss born of immersion. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with rapture and bliss born of immersion. | T: He makes the rapture and pleasure born of concentration drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the rapture and pleasure born of concentration.
mn77:26.3 | S: It’s like a deep lake fed by spring water. There’s no inlet to the east, west, north, or south, and the heavens would not properly bestow showers from time to time. | T: Just as though there were a lake whose waters welled up from below and it had no inflow from east, west, north, or south and would not be replenished from time to time by showers of rain,
mn77:26.4 | S: But the stream of cool water welling up in the lake drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads throughout the lake. There’s no part of the lake that’s not spread through with cool water. | T: then the cool fount of water welling up in the lake would make the cool water drench, steep, fill, and pervade the lake, so that there would be no part of the whole lake unpervaded by cool water;
mn77:26.5 | S: In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads themselves with rapture and bliss born of immersion. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with rapture and bliss born of immersion. | T: so too, a bhikkhu makes the rapture and pleasure born of concentration drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the rapture and pleasure born of concentration.
mn77:27.1 | S: Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and remains in the third absorption. They meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, experiencing for themselves the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’ | T: “Again, with the fading away as well of rapture, a bhikkhu abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in the third jhāna, on account of which noble ones announce: ‘He has a pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.’
mn77:27.2 | S: They drench, steep, fill, and spread themselves with bliss free of rapture. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with bliss free of rapture. | T: He makes the pleasure divested of rapture drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the pleasure divested of rapture.
mn77:27.3 | S: It’s like a pool with blue water lilies, or pink or white lotuses. Some of them sprout and grow in the water without rising above it, thriving underwater. From the tip to the root they’re drenched, steeped, filled, and soaked with cool water. There’s no part of them that’s not soaked with cool water. | T: Just as in a pond of blue or red or white lotuses, some lotuses that are born and grow in the water thrive immersed in the water without rising out of it, and cool water drenches, steeps, fills, and pervades them to their tips and their roots, so that there is no part of all those lotuses unpervaded by cool water;
mn77:27.4 | S: In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads themselves with bliss free of rapture. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with bliss free of rapture. | T: so too, a bhikkhu makes the pleasure divested of rapture drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the pleasure divested of rapture.
mn77:28.1 | S: Furthermore, with the giving up of pleasure and pain and the disappearance of former happiness and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption. It is without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. | T: “Again, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna, which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
mn77:28.2 | S: They sit spreading their body through with pure bright mind. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with pure bright mind. | T: He sits pervading this body with a pure bright mind, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the pure bright mind.
mn77:28.3 | S: It’s like someone sitting wrapped from head to foot with white cloth. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread over with white cloth. | T: Just as though a man were sitting covered from the head down with a white cloth, so that there would be no part of his whole body not covered by the white cloth;
mn77:28.4 | S: In the same way, they sit spreading their body through with pure bright mind. There’s no part of the body that’s not spread with pure bright mind. | T: so too, a bhikkhu sits pervading this body with a pure bright mind, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the pure bright mind.
mn77:28.5 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:29.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to understand this: | T: 12. Insight Knowledge “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to understand thus :
mn77:29.2 | S: ‘This body of mine is formed. It’s made up of the four principal states, produced by mother and father, built up from rice and porridge, liable to impermanence, to wearing away and erosion, to breaking up and destruction. | T: ‘This body of mine, made of material form, consisting of the four great elements, procreated by a mother and father, and built up out of boiled rice and porridge, is subject to impermanence, to being worn and rubbed away, to dissolution and disintegration,
mn77:29.3 | S: And this consciousness of mine is attached to it, tied to it.’ | T: and this consciousness of mine is supported by it and bound up with it.’
mn77:29.4 | S: Suppose there was a beryl gem that was naturally lustrous, eight-faceted, well-worked, transparent and clear, endowed with all good qualities. | T: Suppose there were a beautiful beryl gem of purest water, eight-faceted, well cut, clear and limpid, possessed of all good qualities,
mn77:29.5 | S: And it was strung with a thread of blue, yellow, red, white, or golden brown. | T: and through it a blue, yellow, red, white, or brown thread would be strung.
mn77:29.6 | S: And a person with clear eyes were to take it in their hand and examine it: | T: Then a man with good sight, taking it in his hand, might review it thus:
mn77:29.7 | S: ‘This beryl gem is naturally lustrous, eight-faceted, well-worked, transparent and clear, endowed with all good qualities. | T: ‘This is a beautiful beryl gem of purest water, eight-faceted, well cut, clear and limpid, possessed of all good qualities,
mn77:29.8 | S: And it’s strung with a thread of blue, yellow, red, white, or golden brown.’ | T: and through it is strung a blue, yellow, red, white, or brown thread.’
mn77:29.9 | S: In the same way, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to understand this: | T: So too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to understand thus:
mn77:29.10 | S: ‘This body of mine is formed. It’s made up of the four principal states, produced by mother and father, built up from rice and porridge, liable to impermanence, to wearing away and erosion, to breaking up and destruction. | T: ‘This body of mine…is subject to impermanence, to being worn and rubbed away, to dissolution and disintegration,
mn77:29.11 | S: And this consciousness of mine is attached to it, tied to it.’ | T: and this consciousness of mine is supported by it and bound up with it.’
mn77:29.12 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:30.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to create from this body another body—formed, mind-made, whole in its major and minor limbs, not deficient in any faculty. | T: 13. The Mind-Made Body “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to create from this body another body having form, mind-made, with all its limbs, lacking no faculty.
mn77:30.2 | S: Suppose a person was to draw a reed out from its sheath. | T: Just as though a man were to pull out a reed from its sheath and think thus:
mn77:30.3 | S: They’d think: | T: (none)
mn77:30.4 | S: ‘This is the reed, this is the sheath. The reed and the sheath are different things. The reed has been drawn out from the sheath.’ | T: ‘This is the sheath, this is the reed; the sheath is one, the reed is another; it is from the sheath that the reed has been pulled out’;
mn77:30.5 | S: Or suppose a person was to draw a sword out from its scabbard. | T: or just as though a man were to pull out a sword from its scabbard and think thus:
mn77:30.6 | S: They’d think: | T: (none)
mn77:30.7 | S: ‘This is the sword, this is the scabbard. The sword and the scabbard are different things. The sword has been drawn out from the scabbard.’ | T: ‘This is the sword, this is the scabbard; the sword is one, the scabbard another; it is from the scabbard that the sword has been pulled out’;
mn77:30.8 | S: Or suppose a person was to draw a snake out from its slough. | T: or just as though a man were to pull a snake out of its slough and think thus:
mn77:30.9 | S: They’d think: | T: (none)
mn77:30.10 | S: ‘This is the snake, this is the slough. The snake and the slough are different things. The snake has been drawn out from the slough.’ | T: ‘This is the snake, this is the slough; the snake is one, the slough another; it is from the slough that the snake has been pulled out.’
mn77:30.11 | S: In the same way, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to create from this body another body—formed, mind-made, whole in its major and minor limbs, not deficient in any faculty. | T: So too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to create from this body another body having form, mind-made, with all its limbs, lacking no faculty.
mn77:30.12 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:31.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to wield the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying themselves and becoming one again; materializing and dematerializing; going unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful. They control the body as far as the realm of divinity. | T: 14. The Kinds of Supernormal Power “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to wield the various kinds of supernormal power: having been one, they become many; having been many, they become one; they appear and vanish; they go unhindered through walls, through enclosures, through mountains, as though through space; they dive in and out of the earth as though it were water; they walk on water without sinking as though it were earth; seated cross-legged, they travel in space like birds; with their hands they touch and stroke the moon and sun so powerful and mighty; they wield bodily mastery even as far as the Brahma-world.
mn77:31.2 | S: Suppose a deft potter or their apprentice had some well-prepared clay. They could produce any kind of pot that they like. | T: Just as a skilled potter or his apprentice might create and fashion out of well-prepared clay any shape of pot he wished;
mn77:31.3 | S: Or suppose a deft ivory-carver or their apprentice had some well-prepared ivory. They could produce any kind of ivory item that they like. | T: or just as a skilled ivory-worker or his apprentice might create and fashion out of well-prepared ivory any ivory work of art he wished;
mn77:31.4 | S: Or suppose a deft goldsmith or their apprentice had some well-prepared gold. They could produce any kind of gold item that they like. | T: or just as a skilled goldsmith or his apprentice might create and fashion out of well-prepared gold any gold work of art he wished;
mn77:31.5 | S: In the same way, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to wield the many kinds of psychic power … | T: so too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to wield the various kinds of supernormal power… …they wield bodily mastery even as far as the Brahma-world.
mn77:31.6 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:32.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use so that, with clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, they hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far. | T: 15. The Divine Ear Element “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way whereby with the divine ear element, which is purified and surpasses the human, they hear both kinds of sounds, the divine and the human, those that are far as well as near.
mn77:32.2 | S: Suppose there was a powerful horn blower. They’d easily make themselves heard in the four quarters. | T: Just as a vigorous trumpeter might make himself heard without difficulty in the four quarters;
mn77:32.3 | S: In the same way, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use so that, with clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, they hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far. | T: so too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way whereby with the divine ear element…far as well as near.
mn77:32.4 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:33.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having encompassed them with their own mind. | T: 16. Understanding the Minds of Others “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to understand the minds of other beings, of other persons, having encompassed them with their own minds.
mn77:33.2 | S: They understand mind with greed as ‘mind with greed’, | T: They understand a mind affected by lust as affected by lust and a mind unaffected by lust as unaffected by lust;
mn77:33.3 | S: and mind without greed as ‘mind without greed’; | T: (none)
mn77:33.4 | S: mind with hate as ‘mind with hate’, | T: they understand a mind affected by hate as affected by hate and a mind unaffected by hate as unaffected by hate;
mn77:33.5 | S: and mind without hate as ‘mind without hate’; | T: (none)
mn77:33.6 | S: mind with delusion as ‘mind with delusion’, | T: they understand a mind affected by delusion as affected by delusion and a mind unaffected by delusion as unaffected by delusion;
mn77:33.7 | S: and mind without delusion as ‘mind without delusion’; | T: (none)
mn77:33.8 | S: constricted mind as ‘constricted mind’, | T: they understand a contracted mind as contracted and a distracted mind as distracted;
mn77:33.9 | S: and scattered mind as ‘scattered mind’; | T: (none)
mn77:33.10 | S: expansive mind as ‘expansive mind’, | T: they understand an exalted mind as exalted and an unexalted mind as unexalted;
mn77:33.11 | S: and unexpansive mind as ‘unexpansive mind’; | T: (none)
mn77:33.12 | S: mind that is not supreme as ‘mind that is not supreme’, | T: (none)
mn77:33.13 | S: and mind that is supreme as ‘mind that is supreme’; | T: they understand a surpassed mind as surpassed and an unsurpassed mind as unsurpassed;
mn77:33.14 | S: mind immersed in samādhi as ‘mind immersed in samādhi’, | T: (none)
mn77:33.15 | S: and mind not immersed in samādhi as ‘mind not immersed in samādhi’; | T: they understand a concentrated mind as concentrated and an unconcentrated mind as unconcentrated;
mn77:33.16 | S: freed mind as ‘freed mind’, | T: they understand a liberated mind as liberated and an unliberated mind as unliberated.
mn77:33.17 | S: and unfreed mind as ‘unfreed mind’. | T: (none)
mn77:33.18 | S: Suppose there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of adornments, and they check their own reflection in a clean bright mirror or a clear bowl of water. If they had a spot they’d know ‘I have a spot’, and if they had no spots they’d know ‘I have no spots’. | T: Just as a man or a woman—young, youthful, and fond of ornaments—on viewing the image of his or her own face in a clean bright mirror or in a bowl of clear water, would know if there were a spot thus: ‘There is a spot,’ or would know if there were no spot thus: ‘There is no spot’;
mn77:33.19 | S: In the same way, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having encompassed them with their own mind … | T: so too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to understand…an unliberated mind as unliberated.
mn77:33.36 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:34.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to recollect the many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ And so they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details. | T: 17. The Recollection of Past Lives “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to recollect their manifold past lives, that is, one birth, two births, three births, four births, five births, ten births, twenty births, thirty births, forty births, fifty births, a hundred births, a thousand births, a hundred thousand births, many aeons of world-contraction, many aeons of world-expansion, many aeons of world-contraction and expansion: ‘There I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my nutriment, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life-term; and passing away from there, I reappeared elsewhere; and there too I was so named…and passing away from there, I reappeared here.’ Thus with their aspects and particulars they recollect their manifold past lives.
mn77:34.2 | S: Suppose a person was to leave their home village and go to another village. From that village they’d go to yet another village. And from that village they’d return to their home village. They’d think: ‘I went from my home village to another village. There I stood like this, sat like that, spoke like this, or kept silent like that. From that village I went to yet another village. There too I stood like this, sat like that, spoke like this, or kept silent like that. And from that village I returned to my home village.’ | T: Just as a man might go from his own village to another village and then back again to his own village. He might think: ‘I went from my own village to that village, and there I stood in such a way, sat in such a way, spoke in such a way, kept silent in such a way; and from that village I went to that other village and there I stood in such a way…kept silent in such a way; and from that village I came back again to my own village.’
mn77:34.3 | S: In the same way, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to recollect the many kinds of past lives. | T: So too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to recollect their manifold lives…Thus with their aspects and particulars they recollect their manifold past lives.
mn77:34.4 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:35.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use so that, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds: ‘These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’ And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. | T: 18. The Divine Eye “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way whereby with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, they see beings passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate. They understand how beings pass on according to their actions thus: ‘These worthy beings who were ill conducted in body, speech, and mind, revilers of noble ones, wrong in their views, giving effect to wrong view in their actions, on the dissolution of the body, after death, have reappeared in a state of deprivation, in a bad destination, in perdition, even in hell; but these worthy beings who were well conducted in body, speech, and mind, not revilers of noble ones, right in their views, giving effect to right view in their actions, on the dissolution of the body, after death, have reappeared in a good destination, even in the heavenly world.’ Thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, they see beings passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and they understand how beings pass on according to their actions.
mn77:35.2 | S: Suppose there were two houses with doors. A person with clear eyes standing in between them would see humans entering and leaving a house and wandering to and fro. | T: Just as though there were two houses with doors and a man with good sight standing there between them saw people entering the houses and coming out and passing to and fro.
mn77:35.3 | S: In the same way, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use so that, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn … | T: So too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way whereby with the divine eye…They understand how beings pass on according to their actions.
mn77:35.4 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:36.1 | S: Furthermore, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom. And they live having realized it with their own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements. | T: 19. The Destruction of the Taints “Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way whereby by realising for themselves with direct knowledge, they here and now enter upon and abide in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints.
mn77:36.2 | S: Suppose that in a mountain glen there was a lake that was transparent, clear, and unclouded. A person with clear eyes standing on the bank would see the clams and mussels, pebbles and gravel, and schools of fish swimming about or staying still. They’d think: ‘This lake is transparent, clear, and unclouded. And here are the clams and mussels, pebbles and gravel, and schools of fish swimming about or staying still.’ | T: Just as if there were a lake in a mountain recess, clear, limpid, and undisturbed, so that a man with good sight standing on the bank could see shells, gravel, and pebbles, and also shoals of fish swimming about and resting. He might think: ‘There is this lake, clear, limpid, and undisturbed, and there are these shells, gravel, and pebbles, and also these shoals of fish swimming about and resting.’
mn77:36.3 | S: In the same way, I have explained to my disciples a practice that they use to realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom. And they live having realized it with their own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements. | T: So too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way whereby by realising for themselves with direct knowledge, they here and now enter upon and abide in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints.
mn77:36.4 | S: And many of my disciples meditate on that having attained perfection and consummation of insight. | T: And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.
mn77:37.1 | S: This is the fifth quality because of which my disciples are loyal to me. | T: “This, Udāyin, is the fifth quality because of which my disciples honour,
mn77:38.1 | S: These are the five qualities because of which my disciples honor, respect, revere, and venerate me; and honoring and respecting me, they remain loyal to me.” | T: respect, revere, and venerate me, and live in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me. “These, Udāyin, are the five qualities because of which my disciples honour, respect, revere, and venerate me, and live in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me.”
mn77:38.2 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: That is what the Blessed One said.
mn77:38.3 | S: Satisfied, the wanderer Sakuludāyī approved what the Buddha said. | T: The wanderer Udāyin was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.

