## dn1, continued
dn1:1.13.2 | S: This includes such things as dancing, singing, music, performances, and storytelling; clapping, gongs, and kettledrums; beauty pageants; pole-acrobatics and bone-washing displays of the corpse-workers; battles of elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, goats, rams, chickens, and quails; staff-fights, boxing, and wrestling; combat, roll calls of the armed forces, battle-formations, and regimental reviews. | T: shows featuring dancing, singing, or instrumental music; theatrical performances; narrations of legends; music played by hand-clapping, cymbals, and drums; picture houses; acrobatic performances; combats of elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, goats, rams, cocks and quails; stick-fights, boxing and wrestling, sham-fights, roll-calls, battle-arrays, and regimental reviews—
dn1:1.13.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such shows.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from attending such unsuitable shows.’
dn1:1.13.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.14.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in gambling that causes negligence. | T: “Whereas some honourable recluses and brahmins, while living on food offered by the faithful, indulge in the following games that are a basis for negligence:
dn1:1.14.2 | S: This includes such things as checkers with eight or ten rows, checkers in the air, hopscotch, spillikins, board-games, tip-cat, drawing straws, dice, leaf-flutes, toy plows, somersaults, pinwheels, toy measures, toy carts, toy bows, guessing words from syllables, guessing another’s thoughts, and imitating musical instruments. | T: aṭṭhapada (a game played on an eight-row chess-board); dasapada (a game played on a ten-row chess-board); ākāsa (a game of the same type played by imagining a board in the air); parihārapatha (“hopscotch,” a diagram is drawn on the ground and one has to jump in the allowable spaces avoiding the lines); santika (“spellicans,” assembling the pieces in a pile, removing and returning them without disturbing the pile); khalika (dice games); ghaṭika (hitting a short stick with a long stick); salākahattha (a game played by dipping the hand in paint or dye, striking the ground or a wall, and requiring the participants to show the figure of an elephant, a horse etc.); akkha (ball games); paṅgacīra (blowing through toy pipes made of leaves); vaṅkaka (ploughing with miniature ploughs); mokkhacika (turning somersaults); ciṅgulika (playing with paper windmills); pattāḷaka (playing with toy measures); rathaka (playing with toy chariots); dhanuka (playing with toy bows); akkharika (guessing at letters written in the air or on one’s back); manesika (guessing others’ thoughts); yathāvajja (games involving mimicry of deformities)—
dn1:1.14.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such gambling.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from such games and recreations.’
dn1:1.14.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.15.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still make use of high and luxurious bedding. | T: ‘Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on food offered by the faithful, enjoy the use of high and luxurious beds and seats, such as:
dn1:1.15.2 | S: This includes such things as sofas, couches, woolen covers—shag-piled, colorful, white, embroidered with flowers, quilted, embroidered with animals, double or single fringed—and silk covers studded with gems, as well as silken sheets, woollen carpets, rugs for elephants, horses, or chariots, black antelope hides and woven rugs, and spreads of fine deer hide, with a canopy above and red cushions at both ends. | T: spacious couches; thrones with animal figures carved on the supports; long-haired coverlets; multi-coloured patchwork coverlets; white woollen coverlets; woollen coverlets embroidered with flowers; quilts stuffed with cotton; woollen coverlets embroidered with animal figures; woollen coverlets with hair on both sides or on one side; bedspreads embroidered with gems; silk coverlets; dance-hall carpets; elephant, horse or chariot rugs; rugs of antelope-skins; choice spreads made of kadali-deer hides; spreads with red awnings overhead; couches with red cushions for the head and feet—
dn1:1.15.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such bedding.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from the use of such high and luxurious beds and seats.’
dn1:1.15.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.16.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in attiring and adorning themselves with garlands, fragrance, and makeup. | T: ‘Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, enjoy the use of such devices for embellishing and beautifying themselves as the following:
dn1:1.16.2 | S: This includes such things as applying beauty products by anointing, massaging, bathing, and rubbing; mirrors, ointments, garlands, fragrances, and makeup; face-powder, foundation, bracelets, headbands, fancy walking-sticks or containers, rapiers, parasols, fancy sandals, turbans, jewelry, chowries, and long-fringed white robes. | T: rubbing scented powders into the body, massaging with oils, bathing in perfumed water, kneading the limbs, mirrors, ointments, garlands, scents, unguents, face-powders, make-up, bracelets, head-bands, decorated walking sticks, ornamented medicine-tubes, rapiers, sunshades, embroidered sandals, turbans, diadems, yaktail whisks, and long-fringed white robes—
dn1:1.16.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such beautification and adornment.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from the use of such devices for embellishment and beautification.’
dn1:1.16.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.17.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in low talk. This includes such topics as | T: ‘Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, engage in frivolous chatter, such as:
dn1:1.17.2 | S: talk about kings, bandits, and chief ministers; talk about armies, threats, and wars; talk about food, drink, clothes, and beds; talk about garlands and fragrances; talk about family, vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and countries; talk about women and heroes; talk at the street market and the place for water pots; talk about the departed; motley talk; tales of land and sea; and talk about being reborn in this or that place. | T: talk about kings, thieves, and ministers of state; talk about armies, dangers and wars; talk about food, drink, garments, and lodgings; talk about garlands and scents; talk about relatives, vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and countries; talk about women and talk about heroes; street talk and talk by the well; talk about those departed in days gone by; rambling chit-chat; speculations about the world and about the sea; talk about gain and loss—
dn1:1.17.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low talk.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from such frivolous chatter.’
dn1:1.17.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.18.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in arguments. | T: ‘Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, engage in wrangling argumentation,
dn1:1.18.2 | S: They say such things as: “You don’t understand this teaching and training. I understand this teaching and training. What, you understand this teaching and training? You’re practicing wrong. I’m practicing right. I stay on topic, you don’t. You said last what you should have said first. You said first what you should have said last. What you’ve thought so much about has been disproved. Your doctrine is refuted. Go on, save your doctrine! You’re trapped; get yourself out of this—if you can!” | T: (saying to one another): “You don’t understand this doctrine and discipline. I am the one who understands this doctrine and discipline.” “How can you understand this doctrine and discipline?” “You’re practising the wrong way. I’m practising the right way.” “I’m being consistent. You’re inconsistent.” “What should have been said first you said last, what should have been said last you said first.” “What you took so long to think out has been confuted.” “Your doctrine has been refuted. You’re defeated. Go, try to save your doctrine, or disentangle yourself now if you can”—
dn1:1.18.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such argumentative talk.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from such wrangling argumentation.’
dn1:1.18.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.19.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in running errands and messages. | T: ‘Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, engage in running messages and errands for kings,
dn1:1.19.2 | S: This includes running errands for rulers, ministers, aristocrats, brahmins, householders, or princes who say: “Go here, go there. Take this, bring that from there.” | T: ministers of state, khattiyas, brahmins, householders, or youths, (who command them): “Go here, go there, take this, bring that from there”—
dn1:1.19.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such errands.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from running such messages and errands.’
dn1:1.19.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: (none)
dn1:1.20.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in deceit, flattery, hinting, and belittling, and using material things to chase after other material things. | T: “Or he might say: ‘Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, engage in scheming, talking, hinting, belittling others, and pursuing gain with gain—
dn1:1.20.2 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such fawning and flattery.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from such kinds of scheming and talking.’
dn1:1.20.3 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “It is in this way, bhikkhus, that a worldling would speak when speaking in praise of the Tathāgata.
dn1:1.20.4 | S: The middle section on ethics is complete. | T: 3.
dn1:1.21.0 | S: 2.3. The Large Section on Ethics | T: The Long Section on Virtue (Mahāsīla)
dn1:1.21.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: “Or he might say: ‘Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, earn their living by a wrong means of livelihood, by such debased arts as:
dn1:1.21.2 | S: This includes such fields as augury, omenology, divining portents, interpreting dreams, divining features of men and women, divining holes in cloth gnawed by mice, fire offerings, ladle offerings, offerings of husks, rice powder, rice, ghee, or oil; offerings from the mouth, blood sacrifices, limb-reading; geomancy for building sites, fields, and cemeteries; exorcisms, earth magic, snake charming, poisons; the lore of the scorpion, the rat, the bird, and the crow; prophesying lifespan, chanting for protection, and divining omens from wild animals. | T: prophesying long life, prosperity etc., or the reverse, from the marks on a person’s limbs, hands, feet etc.; divining by means of omens and signs; making auguries on the basis of thunderbolts and celestial portents; interpreting ominous dreams; telling fortunes from marks on the body; making auguries from the marks on cloth gnawed by mice; offering fire oblations; offering oblations from a ladle; offering oblations of husks, rice powder, rice grains, ghee, and oil to the gods; offering oblations from the mouth; offering blood-sacrifices to the gods; making predictions based on the fingertips; determining whether the site for a proposed house or garden is propitious or not; making predictions for officers of state; the knowledge of charms to lay demons in a cemetery; the knowledge of charms to cure one possessed by ghosts; the knowledge of charms to be pronounced by one living in an earthen house; the snake craft (for curing snake bites and charming snakes); the poison craft (for neutralizing or making poison) the scorpion craft and rat craft (for curing scorpion stings and rat bites, respectively); the bird craft and crow craft (for understanding the cries of birds and crows); foretelling the number of years that a man has to live; the knowledge of charms to give protection from arrows; reciting charms to understand the language of animals—
dn1:1.21.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from such wrong means of livelihood, from such debased arts.’
dn1:1.21.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.22.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: ‘Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, earn their living by a wrong means of livelihood,
dn1:1.22.2 | S: This includes reading the marks of gems, cloth, clubs, swords, spears, arrows, bows, weapons, women, men, boys, girls, male and female bondservants, elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, cows, goats, rams, chickens, quails, monitor lizards, rabbits, tortoises, or deer. | T: by such debased arts as interpreting the significance of the colour, shape, and other features of the following items to determine whether they portend fortune or misfortune for their owners: gems, garments, staffs, swords, spears, arrows, bows, other weapons, women, men, boys, girls, slaves, slave-women, elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, cows, goats, rams, fowl, quails, lizards, rabbits, tortoises, and other animals—
dn1:1.22.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from such wrong means of livelihood, from such debased arts.’
dn1:1.22.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.23.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: ‘Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, earn their living by a wrong means of livelihood,
dn1:1.23.2 | S: This includes making predictions that the king will march forth or march back; or that our king will attack and the enemy king will retreat, or vice versa; or that our king will triumph and the enemy king will be defeated, or vice versa; and so there will be victory for one and defeat for the other. | T: by such debased arts as making predictions to the effect that: the king will march forth; the king will not march forth; our king will attack and the enemy king will retreat; the enemy king will attack and our king will retreat; our king will triumph and the enemy king will be defeated; the enemy king will triumph and our king will be defeated; thus there will be victory for one and defeat for the other—
dn1:1.23.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from such wrong means of livelihood, from such debased arts.’
dn1:1.23.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.24.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: ‘Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, earn their living by a wrong means of livelihood, by such debased arts as predicting:
dn1:1.24.2 | S: This includes making predictions that there will be an eclipse of the moon, or sun, or stars; that the sun, moon, and stars will be in conjunction or in opposition; that there will be a meteor shower, a fiery horizon, an earthquake, or thunder in the heavens; that there will be a rising, a setting, a darkening, a brightening of the moon, sun, and stars. And it also includes making predictions about the results of all such phenomena. | T: there will be an eclipse of the moon, an eclipse of the sun, an eclipse of a constellation; the sun and the moon will go on their proper courses; there will be an aberration of the sun and moon; the constellations will go on their proper courses; there will be an aberration of a constellation; there will be a fall of meteors; there will be a skyblaze; there will be an earthquake; there will be an earth-roar; there will be a rising and setting, a darkening and brightening, of the moon, sun, and constellations; such will be the result of the moon’s eclipse, such the result of the sun’s eclipse, (and so on down to) such will be the result of the rising and setting, darkening and brightening of the moon, sun, and constellations—
dn1:1.24.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from such wrong means of livelihood, from such debased arts.’
dn1:1.24.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.25.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: ‘Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, earn their living by a wrong means of livelihood, by such debased arts as predicting:
dn1:1.25.2 | S: This includes predicting whether there will be plenty of rain or drought; plenty to eat or famine; an abundant harvest or a bad harvest; security or peril; sickness or health. It also includes such occupations as arithmetic, accounting, calculating, poetry, and cosmology. | T: there will be abundant rain there will be a drought there will be a good harvest there will be a famine there will be security there will be danger there will be sickness there will be health or they earn their living by accounting, computation, calculation, the composing of poetry, and speculations about the world—
dn1:1.25.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from such wrong means of livelihood, from such debased arts.’
dn1:1.25.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.26.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: ‘Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, earn their living by a wrong means of livelihood, by such debased arts as:
dn1:1.26.2 | S: This includes making arrangements for giving and taking in marriage; for engagement and divorce; and for scattering rice inwards or outwards at the wedding ceremony. It also includes casting spells for good or bad luck, treating impacted fetuses, binding the tongue, or locking the jaws; charms for the hands and ears; questioning a mirror, a girl, or a god as an oracle; worshiping the sun, worshiping the Great One, breathing fire, and invoking Siri, the goddess of luck. | T: arranging auspicious dates for marriages, both those in which the bride is brought in (from another family) and those in which she is sent out (to another family) arranging auspicious dates for betrothals and divorces arranging auspicious dates for the accumulation or expenditure of money reciting charms to make people lucky or unlucky rejuvenating the fetuses of abortive women reciting spells to bind a man’s tongue, to paralyze his jaws, to make him lose control over his hands, to make him lose control over his jaw, or to bring on deafness obtaining oracular answers to questions by means of a mirror, a girl, or a god worshipping the sun worshipping Mahābrahmā bringing forth flames from the mouth invoking the goddess of luck—
dn1:1.26.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from such wrong means of livelihood, from such debased arts.’
dn1:1.26.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or he might say:
dn1:1.27.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: ‘Whereas some recluses and brahmins, while living on the food offered by the faithful, earn their living by a wrong means of livelihood, by such debased arts as:
dn1:1.27.2 | S: This includes rites for propitiation, for granting wishes, for ghosts, for the earth, for rain, for property settlement, and for preparing and consecrating house sites, and rites involving sipping water and bathing, and oblations. It also includes administering emetics, purgatives, expectorants, and phlegmagogues; administering ear-oils, eye restoratives, nasal medicine, ointments, and counter-ointments; surgery with needle and scalpel, treating children, prescribing root medicines, and herbal bandages. | T: promising gifts to deities in return for favours fulfilling such promises demonology reciting spells after entering an earthen house inducing virility and impotence preparing and consecrating sites for a house giving ceremonial mouthwashes and ceremonial bathing offering sacrificial fires administering emetics, purgatives, expectorants and phlegmagogues administering medicine through the ear and through the nose administering ointments and counter-ointments practising fine surgery on the eyes and ears practising general surgery on the body practising as a children’s doctor the application of medicinal roots the binding on of medicinal herbs—
dn1:1.27.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.’ | T: the recluse Gotama abstains from such wrong means of livelihood, from such debased arts.’
dn1:1.27.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: (none)
dn1:1.27.5 | S: These are the trivial, trifling details of mere ethics that an ordinary person speaks of when they speak praise of the Realized One. | T: “These, bhikkhus, are those trifling and insignificant matters, those minor details of mere moral virtue, that a worldling would refer to when speaking in praise of the Tathāgata.
dn1:1.27.6 | S: The longer section on ethics is complete. | T: (none)
dn1:1.28.0.1 | S: 3. Views | T: III.
dn1:1.28.0.2 | S: 3.1. Theories About the First Beginning | T: Speculations about the Past (Pubbantakappika)
dn1:1.28.1 | S: There are other principles—deep, hard to see, hard to understand, peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of logic, subtle, comprehensible to the astute—which the Realized One makes known after realizing them with his own insight. Those who genuinely praise the Realized One would rightly speak of these things. | T: “There are, bhikkhus, other dhammas, deep, difficult to see, difficult to understand, peaceful and sublime, beyond the sphere of reasoning, subtle, comprehensible only to the wise, which the Tathāgata, having realized for himself with direct knowledge, propounds to others; and it is concerning these that those who would rightly praise the Tathāgata in accordance with reality would speak.
dn1:1.28.2 | S: And what are these principles? | T: And what are these dhammas?
dn1:1.29.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who speculate and theorize about the first beginning, and propose various hypotheses concerning the first beginning on eighteen grounds. | T: “There are, bhikkhus, some recluses and brahmins who are speculators about the past, who hold settled views about the past, and who on eighteen grounds assert various conceptual theorems referring to the past.
dn1:1.29.2 | S: And what are the eighteen grounds on which they rely? | T: And owing to what, with reference to what, do these honourable recluses and brahmins frame their speculations?
dn1:1.30.0 | S: 3.1.1. Eternalism | T: 1. Eternalism (Sassatavāda): Views 1–4
dn1:1.30.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who are eternalists, who assert that the self and the cosmos are eternal on four grounds. | T: “There are, bhikkhus, some recluses and brahmins who are eternalists, and who on four grounds proclaim the self and the world to be eternal.
dn1:1.30.2 | S: And what are the four grounds on which they rely? | T: And owing to what,
dn1:1.31.1 | S: It’s when some ascetic or brahmin—by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind—experiences an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they recollect their many kinds of past lives. | T: with reference to what, do these honourable recluses and brahmins proclaim their views? “In the first case, bhikkhus, some recluse or a brahmin, by means of ardour, endeavour, application, diligence, and right reflection, attains to such a degree of mental concentration that with his mind thus concentrated, [purified, clarified, unblemished, devoid of corruptions], he recollects his numerous past lives:
dn1:1.31.2 | S: That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths. They remember: ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ And so they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details. | T: that is, (he recollects) one birth, two, three, four, or five births; ten, twenty, thirty, forty, or fifty births; a hundred, a thousand, or a hundred thousand births; many hundreds of births, many thousands of births, many hundreds of thousands of births. (He recalls:) ‘Then I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance; such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my span of life. Passing away thence, I re-arose there. There too I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance; such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my span of life. Passing away thence, I re-arose here.’ Thus he recollects his numerous past lives in their modes and their details.
dn1:1.31.3 | S: They say: | T: “He speaks thus:
dn1:1.31.4 | S: ‘The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. | T: ‘The self and the world are eternal, barren, steadfast as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar.
dn1:1.31.5 | S: They remain the same for all eternity, while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and rearise. | T: And though these beings roam and wander (through the round of existence), pass away and re-arise, yet the self and the world remain the same just like eternity itself.
dn1:1.31.6 | S: Why is that? | T: What is the reason?
dn1:1.31.7 | S: Because by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind I experience an immersion of the heart of such a kind that I recollect my many kinds of past lives, | T: Because I, by means of ardour, endeavour, application, diligence, and right reflection, attain to such a degree of mental concentration that with my mind thus concentrated, I recollect my numerous past lives in their modes and their details.
dn1:1.31.8 | S: with features and details. | T: (none)
dn1:1.31.9 | S: Because of this I know: | T: For this reason I know this:
dn1:1.31.10 | S: “The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. | T: the self and the world are eternal, barren, steadfast as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar.
dn1:1.31.11 | S: They remain the same for all eternity, while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and rearise.”’ | T: And though these beings roam and wander (through the round of existence), pass away and re-arise, yet the self and the world remain the same just like eternity itself.’
dn1:1.31.12 | S: This is the first ground on which some ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that the self and the cosmos are eternal. | T: “This, bhikkhus, is the first case. “In the second case, owing to what, with reference to what, are some honourable recluses and brahmins eternalists, who proclaim the self and the world to be eternal?
dn1:1.32.1 | S: And what is the second ground on which they rely? | T: (none)
dn1:1.32.2 | S: It’s when some ascetic or brahmin—by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind—experiences an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they recollect their many kinds of past lives. | T: “Herein, bhikkhus, a certain recluse or brahmin, by means of ardour, endeavour, application, diligence, and right reflection, attains to such a degree of mental concentration that with his mind thus concentrated he recollects his numerous past lives:
dn1:1.32.3 | S: That is: one eon of the cosmos contracting and expanding; two, three, four, five, or ten eons of the cosmos contracting and expanding. They remember: ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ And so they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details. | T: that is, (he recollects his past lives throughout) one aeon of world-contraction and expansion, throughout two, three, four, five, or ten aeons of world-contraction and expansion. (He recalls:) ‘Then I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance; such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my span of life. Passing away thence, I re-arose there. There too I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance; such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my span of life. Passing away thence, I re-arose here.’
dn1:1.32.4 | S: They say: | T: (none)
dn1:1.32.5 | S: ‘The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. | T: (none)
dn1:1.32.6 | S: They remain the same for all eternity, while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and rearise. | T: (none)
dn1:1.32.7 | S: Why is that? | T: (none)
dn1:1.32.8 | S: Because by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind I experience an immersion of the heart of such a kind that I recollect my many kinds of past lives, | T: Thus he recollects his numerous past lives in their modes and their details.
dn1:1.32.9 | S: with features and details. | T: (none)
dn1:1.32.10 | S: Because of this I know: | T: “He speaks thus:
dn1:1.32.11 | S: “The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. They remain the same for all eternity, while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and rearise.”’ | T: ‘The self and the world are eternal, barren, steadfast as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. And though these beings roam and wander (through the round of existence), pass away and re-arise, yet the self and the world remain the same just like eternity itself. What is the reason? “ (The remainder is exactly the same as §31 except for the extent of time recollected.)
dn1:1.32.12 | S: This is the second ground on which some ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that the self and the cosmos are eternal. | T: “This, bhikkhus, is the second reason.
dn1:1.33.1 | S: And what is the third ground on which they rely? | T: “In the third case, owing to what, with reference to what, are some honourable recluses and brahmins eternalists, who proclaim the self and the world to be eternal?
dn1:1.33.2 | S: It’s when some ascetic or brahmin—by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind—experiences an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they recollect their many kinds of past lives. | T: “Herein, bhikkhus, some recluse or brahmin, by means of ardour, endeavour, application, diligence, and right reflection, attains to such a degree of mental concentration that with his mind thus concentrated he recollects his numerous past lives:
dn1:1.33.3 | S: That is: ten eons of the cosmos contracting and expanding; twenty, thirty, or forty eons of the cosmos contracting and expanding. They remember: ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ And so they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details. | T: that is, (he recollects his past lives throughout) ten aeons of world-contraction and expansion, throughout twenty, thirty, or forty aeons of world-contraction and expansion … (As above) … Thus he recollects his numerous past lives in their modes and their details.
dn1:1.33.4 | S: They say: | T: “He speaks thus:
dn1:1.33.5 | S: ‘The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. | T: ‘The self and the world are eternal, barren, steadfast as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar.
dn1:1.33.6 | S: They remain the same for all eternity, while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and rearise. | T: And though these beings roam and wander (through the round of existence),
dn1:1.33.7 | S: Why is that? | T: (none)
dn1:1.33.8 | S: Because by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind I experience an immersion of the heart of such a kind that I recollect my many kinds of past lives, | T: (none)
dn1:1.33.9 | S: with features and details. | T: (none)
dn1:1.33.10 | S: Because of this I know: | T: (none)
dn1:1.33.11 | S: “The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. They remain the same for all eternity, while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and rearise.”’ | T: pass away and re-arise, yet the self and the world remain the same just like eternity itself. What is the reason? (As in §31 except for the extent of time.)
dn1:1.33.12 | S: This is the third ground on which some ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that the self and the cosmos are eternal. | T: “This, bhikkhus, is the third case.
dn1:1.34.1 | S: And what is the fourth ground on which they rely? | T: “In the fourth case, owing to what,
dn1:1.34.2 | S: It’s when some ascetic or brahmin relies on logic and inquiry. They speak of what they have worked out by logic, following a line of inquiry, expressing their own perspective: | T: with reference to what, are some honourable recluses and brahmins eternalists, who proclaim the self and the world to be eternal? “Herein, bhikkhus, some recluse or brahmin is a rationalist, an investigator. He declares his view—hammered out by reason, deduced from his investigations, following his own flight of thought—thus:
dn1:1.34.3 | S: ‘The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. | T: “The self and the world are eternal, barren, steadfast as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar.
dn1:1.34.4 | S: They remain the same for all eternity, while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and rearise.’ | T: And though these beings roam and wander (through the round of existence), pass away and re-arise, yet the self and the world remain the same just like eternity itself.’
dn1:1.34.5 | S: This is the fourth ground on which some ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that the self and the cosmos are eternal. | T: “This, bhikkhus, is the fourth case.
dn1:1.35.1 | S: These are the four grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins assert that the self and the cosmos are eternal. | T: “It is on these four grounds, bhikkhus, that those recluses and brahmins who are eternalists proclaim the self and the world to be eternal.
dn1:1.35.2 | S: Any ascetics and brahmins who assert that the self and the cosmos are eternal do so on one or other of these four grounds. Outside of this there is none. | T: Whatever recluses and brahmins there may be who proclaim the self and the world to be eternal, all of them do so on these four grounds or on a certain one of them. Outside of these there is none.
dn1:1.36.1 | S: The Realized One understands this: | T: “This, bhikkhus, the Tathāgata understands. And he understands:
dn1:1.36.2 | S: ‘If you hold on to and attach to these grounds for views it leads to such a destiny in the next life.’ | T: ‘These standpoints, thus assumed and thus misapprehended, lead to such a future destination,
dn1:1.36.3 | S: He understands this, and what goes beyond this. And since he does not misapprehend that understanding, he has realized quenching within himself. | T: to such a state in the world beyond.’ He understands as well what transcends this, yet even that understanding he does not misapprehend. And because he is free from misapprehension, he has realized within himself the state of perfect peace.
dn1:1.36.4 | S: Having truly understood the origin, disappearance, gratification, drawback, and escape from feelings, the Realized One is freed by not grasping. | T: Having understood as they really are the origin and the passing away of feelings, their satisfaction, their unsatisfactoriness, and the escape from them, the Tathāgata, bhikkhus, is emancipated through non-clinging.
dn1:1.37.1 | S: These are the principles—deep, hard to see, hard to understand, peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of logic, subtle, comprehensible to the astute—which the Realized One makes known after realizing them with his own insight. And those who genuinely praise the Realized One would rightly speak of these things. | T: “These are those dhammas, bhikkhus, that are deep, difficult to see, difficult to understand, peaceful and sublime, beyond the sphere of reasoning, subtle, comprehensible only to the wise, which the Tathāgata, having realized for himself with direct knowledge, propounds to others; and it is concerning these that those who would rightly praise the Tathāgata in accordance with reality would speak.
dn1:1.37.2 | S: The first recitation section. | T: 2.
dn1:2.1.0 | S: 3.1.2. Partial Eternalism | T: Partial-Eternalism (Ekaccasassatavāda): Views 5–8
dn1:2.1.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who are partial eternalists, who assert that the self and the cosmos are partially eternal and partially not eternal on four grounds. | T: “There are, bhikkhus, some recluses and brahmins who are eternalists in regard to some things and non-eternalists in regard to other things, and who on four grounds proclaim the self and the world to be partly eternal and partly non-eternal.
dn1:2.1.2 | S: And what are the four grounds on which they rely? | T: And owing to what, with reference to what, do these honourable recluses and brahmins proclaim their views?
dn1:2.2.1 | S: There comes a time when, after a very long period has passed, this cosmos contracts. | T: “There comes a time, bhikkhus, when after the lapse of a long period this world contracts (disintegrates).
dn1:2.2.2 | S: As the cosmos contracts, sentient beings are mostly headed for the realm of sublime luminosity. | T: While the world is contracting, beings for the most part are reborn in the Ābhassara Brahma-world.
dn1:2.2.3 | S: There they are mind-made, feeding on rapture, self-radiant, wandering in midair, steadily glorious, and they remain like that for a very long time. | T: There they dwell, mind-made, feeding on rapture, self-luminous, moving through the air, abiding in glory. And they continue thus for a long, long period of time.
dn1:2.3.1 | S: There comes a time when, after a very long period has passed, this cosmos expands. | T: “But sooner or later, bhikkhus, after the lapse of a long period, there comes a time when this world begins to expand once again.
dn1:2.3.2 | S: As it expands an empty mansion of divinity appears. | T: While the world is expanding, an empty palace of Brahmā appears.
dn1:2.3.3 | S: Then a certain sentient being—due to the running out of their life-span or merit—passes away from that host of luminous deities and is reborn in that empty mansion of divinity. | T: Then a certain being, due to the exhaustion of his life-span or the exhaustion of his merit, passes away from the Ābhassara plane and re-arises in the empty palace of Brahmā.
dn1:2.3.4 | S: There they are mind-made, feeding on rapture, self-radiant, wandering in midair, steadily glorious, and they remain like that for a very long time. | T: There he dwells, mind made, feeding on rapture, self-luminous, moving through the air, abiding in glory. And he continues thus for a long, long period of time.
dn1:2.4.1 | S: But after staying there all alone for a long time, they become dissatisfied and anxious: | T: “Then, as a result of dwelling there all alone for so long a time, there arises in him dissatisfaction and agitation, (and he yearns):
dn1:2.4.2 | S: ‘Oh, if only other beings would come to this place.’ | T: ‘Oh, that other beings might come to this place!’
dn1:2.4.3 | S: Then other sentient beings—due to the running out of their life-span or merit—pass away from that host of luminous deities and are reborn in that mansion of divinity in company with that being. | T: Just at that moment, due to the exhaustion of their life-span or the exhaustion of their merit, certain other beings pass away from the Ābhassara plane and re-arise in the palace of Brahmā, in companionship with him.
dn1:2.4.4 | S: There they too are mind-made, feeding on rapture, self-radiant, wandering in midair, steadily glorious, and they remain like that for a very long time. | T: There they dwell, mind-made, feeding on rapture, self-luminous, moving through the air, abiding in glory. And they continue thus for a long, long period of time.
dn1:2.5.1 | S: Now, the being who was reborn there first thinks: | T: “Thereupon the being who re-arose there first thinks to himself:
dn1:2.5.2 | S: ‘I am the Divinity, the Great Divinity, the Vanquisher, the Unvanquished, the Universal Seer, the Wielder of Power, God Almighty, the Maker, the Creator, the First, the Begetter, the Controller, the Father of those who have been born and those yet to be born. | T: ‘I am Brahmā, the Great Brahmā, the Vanquisher, the Unvanquished, the Universal Seer, the Wielder of Power, the Lord, the Maker and Creator, the Supreme Being, the Ordainer, the Almighty, the Father of all that are and are to be.
dn1:2.5.3 | S: These beings were created by me! | T: And these beings have been created by me.
dn1:2.5.4 | S: Why is that? | T: What is the reason?
dn1:2.5.5 | S: Because first I thought: | T: Because first I made the wish:
dn1:2.5.6 | S: “Oh, if only other beings would come to this place.” | T: “Oh, that other beings might come to this place!” And after I made this resolution, now these beings have come.’
dn1:2.5.7 | S: Such was my heart’s wish, and then these creatures came to this place.’ | T: (none)
dn1:2.5.8 | S: And the beings who were reborn there later also think: | T: “And the beings who re-arose there after him also think:
dn1:2.5.9 | S: ‘This must be the Divinity, the Great Divinity, the Vanquisher, the Unvanquished, the Universal Seer, the Wielder of Power, God Almighty, the Maker, the Creator, the First, the Begetter, the Controller, the Father of those who have been born and those yet to be born. | T: ‘This must be Brahmā, the Great Brahmā, the Vanquisher, the Unvanquished, the Universal Seer, the Wielder of Power, the Lord, the Maker and Creator, the Supreme Being, the Ordainer, the Almighty, the Father of all that are and are to be.
dn1:2.5.10 | S: And we were created by him. | T: And we have been created by him.
dn1:2.5.11 | S: Why is that? | T: What is the reason?
dn1:2.5.12 | S: Because we see that he was reborn here first, and we arrived later.’ | T: Because we see that he was here first, and we appeared here after him.’
dn1:2.6.1 | S: And the being who was reborn first is more long-lived, beautiful, and illustrious than those who arrived later. | T: “Herein, bhikkhus, the being who re-arose there first possesses longer life, greater beauty, and greater authority than the beings who re-arose there after him.
dn1:2.6.3 | S: It’s possible that one of those beings passes away from that host and is reborn in this place. | T: “Now, bhikkhus, this comes to pass, that a certain being, after passing away from that plane, takes rebirth in this world.
dn1:2.6.4 | S: Having done so, they go forth from the lay life to homelessness. | T: Having come to this world, he goes forth from home to homelessness. When he has gone forth,
dn1:2.6.5 | S: By dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind, they experience an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they recollect that past life, but no further. | T: by means of ardour, endeavour, application, diligence, and right reflection, he attains to such a degree of mental concentration that with his mind thus concentrated he recollects his immediately preceding life, but none previous to that.
dn1:2.6.6 | S: They say: | T: He speaks thus:
dn1:2.6.7 | S: ‘He who is the Divinity—the Great Divinity, the Vanquisher, the Unvanquished, the Universal Seer, the Wielder of Power, God Almighty, the Maker, the Creator, the First, the Begetter, the Controller, the Father of those who have been born and those yet to be born—by he we were created. He is permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable, remaining the same for all eternity. | T: ‘We were created by him, by Brahmā, the Great Brahmā, the Vanquisher, the Unvanquished, the Universal Seer, the Wielder of Power, the Lord, the Maker and Creator, the Supreme Being, the Ordainer, the Almighty, the Father of all that are and are to be. He is permanent, stable, eternal, not subject to change, and he will remain the same just like eternity itself.
dn1:2.6.8 | S: We who were created by that divinity are impermanent, not lasting, short-lived, liable to pass away, and have come to this place.’ | T: But we, who have been created by him and have come to this world, are impermanent, unstable, short-lived, doomed to perish.’
dn1:2.6.9 | S: This is the first ground on which some ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that the self and the cosmos are partially eternal. | T: “This, bhikkhus, is the first case. “In the second case, owing to what, with reference to what, are some honourable recluses and brahmins eternalists in regard to some things and non-eternalists in regard to other things, proclaiming the self and the world to be partly eternal and partly non-eternal?
dn1:2.7.1 | S: And what is the second ground on which they rely? | T: (none)
dn1:2.7.2 | S: There are gods named ‘depraved by play.’ They spend too much time laughing, playing, and making merry. And in doing so, they lose their mindfulness, and they pass away from that host of gods. | T: “There are, bhikkhus, certain gods called ‘corrupted by play.’ These gods spend an excessive time indulging in the delights of laughter and play. As a consequence they become forgetful and, when they become forgetful, they pass away from that plane.
dn1:2.8.1 | S: It’s possible that one of those beings passes away from that host and is reborn in this place. | T: “Now, bhikkhus, this comes to pass, that a certain being, after passing away from that plane, takes rebirth in this world.
dn1:2.8.2 | S: Having done so, they go forth from the lay life to homelessness. | T: Having come to this world, he goes forth from home to homelessness. When he has gone forth,
dn1:2.8.3 | S: By dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind, they experience an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they recollect that past life, but no further. | T: by means of ardour, endeavour, application, diligence, and right reflection, he attains to such a degree of mental concentration that with his mind thus concentrated he recollects his immediately preceding life, but none previous to that.
dn1:2.9.1 | S: They say: | T: He speaks thus:
dn1:2.9.2 | S: ‘The gods not depraved by play don’t spend too much time laughing, playing, and making merry. So they don’t lose their mindfulness, and don’t pass away from that host of gods. | T: ‘Those honourable gods who are not corrupted by play do not spend an excessive time indulging in the delights of laughter and play. As a consequence they do not become forgetful, and because they do not become forgetful they do not pass away from that plane.
dn1:2.9.3 | S: They are permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable, remaining the same for all eternity. | T: Those gods are permanent, stable, eternal, not subject to change, and they will remain the same just like eternity itself.
dn1:2.9.4 | S: But we who were depraved by play spent too much time laughing, playing, and making merry. In doing so, we lost our mindfulness, and passed away from that host of gods. | T: But we were gods corrupted by play. We spent an excessive time indulging in the delights of laughter and play, and as a consequence we became forgetful. When we became forgetful we passed away from that plane.
dn1:2.9.5 | S: We are impermanent, not lasting, short-lived, liable to pass away, and have come to this place.’ | T: Coming to this world, now we are impermanent, unstable, short lived, doomed to perish.’
dn1:2.9.6 | S: This is the second ground on which some ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that the self and the cosmos are partially eternal. | T: “This bhikkhus, is the second case. “In the third case, owing to what, with reference to what, are some honourable recluses and brahmins eternalists in regard to some things and non-eternalists in regard to other things, proclaiming the self and the world to be partly eternal and partly non-eternal?
dn1:2.10.1 | S: And what is the third ground on which they rely? | T: (none)
dn1:2.10.2 | S: There are gods named ‘malevolent’. They spend too much time gazing at each other, so they grow angry with each other, and their bodies and minds get tired. They pass away from that host of gods. | T: “There are, bhikkhus, certain gods called ‘corrupted by mind.’ These gods contemplate one another with excessive envy. As a consequence their minds becomes corrupted by anger towards one another. When their minds are corrupted by anger, their bodies and minds become exhausted and consequently, they pass away from that plane.
dn1:2.11.1 | S: It’s possible that one of those beings passes away from that host and is reborn in this place. | T: “Now, bhikkhus, this comes to pass, that a certain being, after passing away from that plane, takes rebirth in this world.
dn1:2.11.2 | S: Having done so, they go forth from the lay life to homelessness. | T: Having come to this world, he goes forth from home to homelessness. When he has gone forth,
dn1:2.11.3 | S: By dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind, they experience an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they recollect that past life, but no further. | T: by means of ardour, endeavour, application, diligence, and right reflection, he attains to such a degree of mental concentration that with his mind thus concentrated he recollects his immediately preceding life, but none previous to that.
dn1:2.12.1 | S: They say: | T: He speaks thus:
dn1:2.12.2 | S: ‘The gods who are not malevolent don’t spend too much time gazing at each other, so they don’t grow angry with each other, their bodies and minds don’t get tired, and they don’t pass away from that host of gods. | T: ‘Those honourable gods who are not corrupted by mind do not contemplate each other with excessive envy. As a result, their minds do not become corrupted by anger towards one another, their bodies and minds do not become exhausted, and they do not pass away from that plane.
dn1:2.12.3 | S: They are permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable, remaining the same for all eternity. | T: Those gods are permanent, stable, not subject to change, and they will remain the same just like eternity itself.
dn1:2.12.4 | S: But we who were malevolent spent too much time gazing at each other, we grew angry with each other, our bodies and minds got tired, and we passed away from that host of gods. | T: But we were gods corrupted by mind. We contemplated each other with excessive envy and as a result our minds became corrupted by anger towards one another. When our minds were corrupted by anger, our bodies and minds became exhausted and consequently, we passed away from that plane.
dn1:2.12.5 | S: We are impermanent, not lasting, short-lived, liable to pass away, and have come to this place.’ | T: Coming to this world, now we are impermanent, unstable, short-lived, doomed to perish.’
dn1:2.12.6 | S: This is the third ground on which some ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that the self and the cosmos are partially eternal. | T: “This, bhikkhus, is the third case. “In the fourth case, owing to what, with reference to what, are some honourable recluses and brahmins eternalists in regard to some things and non-eternalists in regard to other things, proclaiming the self and the world to be partly eternal and partly non-eternal?
dn1:2.13.1 | S: And what is the fourth ground on which they rely? | T: (none)
dn1:2.13.2 | S: It’s when some ascetic or brahmin relies on logic and inquiry. They speak of what they have worked out by logic, following a line of inquiry, expressing their own perspective: | T: “Herein, bhikkhus, recluse or a certain brahmin is a rationalist, an investigator. He declares his view—hammered out by reason, deduced from his investigations, following his own flight of thought—thus:
dn1:2.13.3 | S: ‘That which is called “the eye”, “the ear”, “the nose”, “the tongue”, and also “the body”: that self is impermanent, not lasting, transient, perishable. | T: ‘That which is called “the eye,” “the ear,” “the nose,” “the tongue,” and “the body”—that self is impermanent, unstable, non-eternal, subject to change.
dn1:2.13.4 | S: That which is called “mind” or “sentience” or “consciousness”: that self is permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable, remaining the same for all eternity.’ | T: But that which is called “mind” (citta) or “mentality” (mano) or “consciousness” (viññāṇa)—that self is permanent, stable, eternal, not subject to change, and it will remain the same just like eternity itself.’
dn1:2.13.5 | S: This is the fourth ground on which some ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that the self and the cosmos are partially eternal. | T: “This, bhikkhus, is the fourth case.
dn1:2.14.1 | S: These are the four grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins assert that the self and the cosmos are partially eternal and partially not eternal. | T: “It is on these four grounds, bhikkhus, that those recluses and brahmins who are partial-eternalists proclaim the self and the world to be partly eternal and partly non-eternal.
dn1:2.14.2 | S: Any ascetics and brahmins who assert that the self and the cosmos are partially eternal and partially not eternal do so on one or other of these four grounds. Outside of this there is none. | T: Whatever recluses and brahmins there may be who proclaim the self and the world to be partly eternal and partly non-eternal, all of them do so on these four grounds or on a certain one of them. Outside of these there is none.
dn1:2.15.1 | S: The Realized One understands this: | T: “This, bhikkhus, the Tathāgata understands. And he understands:
dn1:2.15.2 | S: ‘If you hold on to and attach to these grounds for views it leads to such a destiny in the next life.’ | T: ‘These standpoints, thus assumed and thus misapprehended, lead to such a future destination,
dn1:2.15.3 | S: He understands this, and what goes beyond this. And since he does not misapprehend that understanding, he has realized quenching within himself. | T: to such a state in the world beyond.’ He understands as well what transcends this, yet even that understanding he does not misapprehend. And because he is free from misapprehension, he has realized within himself the state of perfect peace.
dn1:2.15.4 | S: Having truly understood the origin, disappearance, gratification, drawback, and escape from feelings, the Realized One is freed by not grasping. | T: Having understood as they really are the origin and the passing away of feelings, their satisfaction, their unsatisfactoriness, and the escape from them, the Tathāgata, bhikkhus, is emancipated through non-clinging.
dn1:2.15.5 | S: These are the principles—deep, hard to see, hard to understand, peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of logic, subtle, comprehensible to the astute—which the Realized One makes known after realizing them with his own insight. And those who genuinely praise the Realized One would rightly speak of these things. | T: “These are those dhammas, bhikkhus, that are deep, difficult to see, difficult to understand, peaceful and sublime, beyond the sphere of reasoning, subtle, comprehensible only to the wise, which the Tathāgata, having realized for himself with direct knowledge, propounds to others; and it is concerning these that those who would rightly praise the Tathāgata in accordance with reality would speak.
dn1:2.16.0 | S: 3.1.3. The Cosmos is Finite or Infinite | T: 3. Doctrines of the Finitude and Infinity of the World (Antānantavāda): Views 9–12
dn1:2.16.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who speculate and theorize about size, and assert that the cosmos is finite or infinite on four grounds. | T: “There are, bhikkhus, some recluses and brahmins who are extensionists, and who on four grounds proclaim the world to be finite or infinite.
dn1:2.16.2 | S: And what are the four grounds on which they rely? | T: And owing to what,
dn1:2.17.1 | S: It’s when some ascetic or brahmin—by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind—experiences an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they meditate perceiving the cosmos as finite. | T: with reference to what, do these honourable recluses and brahmins proclaim their views? “In the first case, bhikkhus, a certain recluse or a brahmin, by means of ardour, endeavour, application, diligence, and right reflection, attains to such a degree of mental concentration that with his mind thus concentrated he abides perceiving the world as finite.
dn1:2.17.2 | S: They say: | T: He speaks thus:
dn1:2.17.3 | S: ‘The cosmos is finite and restricted. | T: ‘The world is finite and bounded.
dn1:2.17.4 | S: Why is that? | T: What is the reason?
dn1:2.17.5 | S: Because by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind I experience an immersion of the heart of such a kind that I meditate perceiving the cosmos as finite. | T: Because I attain to such concentration of mind that I abide perceiving the world as finite.
