## an10.219
an10.219:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, I don’t say that intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated are eliminated without being experienced. | T: “Bhikkhus, I do not say that there is a termination of volitional kamma that has been done and accumulated so long as one has not experienced its results,
an10.219:1.2 | S: And that may be in this very life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. | T: and that may be in this very life, or in the next rebirth, or on some subsequent occasion.
an10.219:1.3 | S: But in any case, there is no making an end of suffering without experiencing intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated, I say. | T: But I do not say that there is making an end of suffering so long as one has not experienced the results of volitional kamma that has been done and accumulated.
an10.219:2.1 | S: That noble disciple is rid of desire, rid of ill will, unconfused, aware, and mindful. They meditate spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of love to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. | T: “This noble disciple, bhikkhus, who is thus devoid of longing, devoid of ill will, unconfused, clearly comprehending, ever mindful, dwells pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter. Thus above, below, across, and everywhere, and to all as to himself, he dwells pervading the entire world with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, vast, exalted, measureless, without enmity, without ill will.
an10.219:3.1 | S: They understand: | T: He understands thus:
an10.219:3.2 | S: ‘Formerly my mind was limited and undeveloped. Now it’s limitless and well developed. Whatever limited deeds I’ve done don’t remain or persist there.’ | T: ‘Previously, my mind was limited and undeveloped, but now it is measureless and well developed. No measurable kamma remains or persists there.’
an10.219:4.1 | S: What do you think, mendicants? | T: “What do you think, bhikkhus,
an10.219:4.2 | S: Suppose a child had developed the heart’s release by love from their childhood on. Would they still do any bad deed?” | T: if a youth were to develop the liberation of mind by loving-kindness from his childhood on, would he do a bad deed?”
an10.219:4.3 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “No, Bhante.”
an10.219:5.1 | S: “Not doing any bad deed, would they still experience any suffering?” | T: “Could suffering affect him if he does no bad deed?”
an10.219:5.2 | S: “No, sir. | T: “No, Bhante.
an10.219:5.3 | S: For if they don’t do any bad deed, from where would suffering afflict them?” | T: For on what account could suffering affect one who does no bad deed?”
an10.219:6.1 | S: “This heart’s release by love should be developed by women or men. | T: “A woman or a man should develop this liberation of mind by loving-kindness.
an10.219:6.2 | S: For neither women nor men take this body with them when they go. | T: A woman or a man cannot take this body with them when they go.
an10.219:6.3 | S: The mind is what’s inside mortal beings. | T: Mortals have mind as their core.
an10.219:6.4 | S: They understand: | T: “The noble disciple understands:
an10.219:6.5 | S: ‘Whatever bad deeds I have done in the past with this deed-born body I will experience here. | T: ‘Whatever bad deed I did here in the past with this deed-born body is all to be experienced here.
an10.219:6.6 | S: It will not follow me to my next life.’ | T: It will not follow along.’
an10.219:6.7 | S: The heart’s release by love developed in this way leads to non-return for a wise mendicant here who has not penetrated to a higher freedom. | T: When the liberation of mind by loving-kindness has been developed in this way, it leads to non-returning for a wise bhikkhu here who does not penetrate to a further liberation.
an10.219:7.1 | S: They meditate spreading a heart full of compassion … | T: “This noble disciple, bhikkhus, who is thus devoid of longing, devoid of ill will, unconfused, clearly comprehending, ever mindful, dwells pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with compassion …
an10.219:7.2 | S: They meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing … | T: with a mind imbued with altruistic joy …
an10.219:7.3 | S: They meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. | T: with a mind imbued with equanimity, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter.
an10.219:7.4 | S: In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. | T: Thus above, below, across, and everywhere, and to all as to himself, he dwells pervading the entire world with a mind imbued with equanimity, vast, exalted, measureless, without enmity, without ill will.
an10.219:8.1 | S: They understand: | T: He understands thus:
an10.219:8.2 | S: ‘Formerly my mind was limited and undeveloped. Now it’s limitless and well developed. Whatever limited deeds I’ve done don’t remain or persist there.’ | T: ‘Previously, my mind was limited and undeveloped, but now it is measureless and well developed. No measurable kamma remains or persists there.’
an10.219:9.1 | S: What do you think, mendicants? | T: “What do you think, bhikkhus,
an10.219:9.2 | S: Suppose a child had developed the heart’s release by equanimity from their childhood on. Would they still do any bad deed?” | T: if a youth would develop the liberation of mind by equanimity, from his childhood on, would he do a bad deed?”
an10.219:9.3 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “No, Bhante.”
an10.219:10.1 | S: “Not doing any bad deed, would they still experience any suffering?” | T: “Could suffering affect him if he does no bad deed?”
an10.219:10.2 | S: “No, sir. | T: “No, Bhante.
an10.219:10.3 | S: For if they don’t do any bad deed, from where would suffering afflict them?” | T: For on what account could suffering affect one who does no bad deed?”
an10.219:11.1 | S: “This heart’s release by equanimity should be developed by women or men. | T: “A woman or a man should develop this liberation of mind by equanimity.
an10.219:11.2 | S: For neither women nor men take this body with them when they go. | T: A woman or a man cannot take this body with them when they go.
an10.219:11.3 | S: The mind is what’s inside mortal beings. | T: Mortals have mind as their core.
an10.219:11.4 | S: They understand: | T: “The noble disciple understands:
an10.219:11.5 | S: ‘Whatever bad deeds I have done in the past with this deed-born body I will experience here. | T: ‘Whatever bad deed I did here in the past with this deed-born body is all to be experienced here.
an10.219:11.6 | S: It will not follow me to my next life.’ | T: It will not follow along.’
an10.219:11.7 | S: The heart’s release by equanimity developed in this way leads to non-return for a wise mendicant here who has not penetrated to a higher freedom.” | T: When the liberation of mind by equanimity has been developed in this way, it leads to non-returning for a wise bhikkhu here who does not penetrate to a further liberation.”

## an10.21
an10.21:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, toward evening the lion, king of beasts, emerges from his den, | T: “Bhikkhus, in the evening the lion, the king of beasts, comes out from his lair,
an10.21:1.2 | S: yawns, | T: stretches his body,
an10.21:1.3 | S: surveys the four quarters, | T: surveys the four quarters all around,
an10.21:1.4 | S: and roars his lion’s roar three times. | T: and roars his lion’s roar three times.
an10.21:1.5 | S: Then he sets out on the hunt. | T: Then he sets out in search of game.
an10.21:1.6 | S: Why is that? | T: For what reason?
an10.21:1.7 | S: ‘May I not injure any little creatures on unclear ground.’ | T: With the thought: ‘Let me not cause harm to small creatures that might cross my track.’
an10.21:2.1 | S: ‘Lion’ is a term for the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. | T: “‘The lion,’ bhikkhus, is a designation for the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
an10.21:2.2 | S: When the Realized One teaches Dhamma to an assembly, this is his lion’s roar. | T: When the Tathāgata teaches the Dhamma to an assembly, this is his lion’s roar.
an10.21:3.1 | S: The Realized One possesses ten powers of a Realized One. With these he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel. | T: “Bhikkhus, there are these ten Tathāgata’s powers that the Tathāgata has, possessing which he claims the place of the chief bull, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and sets in motion the brahma wheel.
an10.21:3.2 | S: What ten? | T: What ten?
an10.21:3.3 | S: Firstly, the Realized One truly understands the possible as possible and the impossible as impossible. | T: (1) “Here, the Tathāgata understands as it really is the possible as possible and the impossible as impossible. Since the Tathāgata understands as it really is the possible as possible and the impossible as impossible,
an10.21:3.4 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. Relying on this he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel. | T: this is a Tathāgata’s power that the Tathāgata has, on account of which he claims the place of the chief bull, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and sets in motion the brahma wheel.
an10.21:4.1 | S: Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the result of deeds undertaken in the past, future, and present in terms of grounds and causes. | T: (2) “Again, the Tathāgata understands as it really is the result of the undertaking of kamma past, future, and present in terms of possibilities and causes. Since the Tathāgata understands as it really is … the result of the undertaking of kamma …
an10.21:4.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … | T: this too is a Tathāgata’s power that the Tathāgata has, on account of which he … sets in motion the brahma wheel.
an10.21:5.1 | S: Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands where all paths of practice lead. | T: (3) “Again, the Tathāgata understands as it really is the ways leading everywhere. Since the Tathāgata understands as it really is the ways leading everywhere,
an10.21:5.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … | T: this too is a Tathāgata’s power that the Tathāgata has, on account of which he … sets in motion the brahma wheel.
an10.21:6.1 | S: Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the world with its many and diverse elements. | T: (4) “Again, the Tathāgata understands as it really is the world with its numerous and diverse elements. Since the Tathāgata understands as it really is the world with its numerous and diverse elements,
an10.21:6.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … | T: this too is a Tathāgata’s power that the Tathāgata has, on account of which … he sets in motion the brahma wheel.
an10.21:7.1 | S: Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the diverse convictions of sentient beings. | T: (5) “Again, the Tathāgata understands as it really is the diversity in the dispositions of beings. Since the Tathāgata understands as it really is the diversity in the dispositions of beings,
an10.21:7.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … | T: this too is a Tathāgata’s power that the Tathāgata has, on account of which … he sets in motion the brahma wheel.
an10.21:8.1 | S: Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the faculties of other sentient beings and other individuals after encompassing them with his mind. | T: (6) “Again, the Tathāgata understands as it really is the superior or inferior condition of the faculties of other beings and persons. Since the Tathāgata understands as it really is the superior or inferior condition of the faculties of other beings and persons,
an10.21:8.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … | T: this too is a Tathāgata’s power that the Tathāgata has, on account of which … he sets in motion the brahma wheel.
an10.21:9.1 | S: Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands corruption, cleansing, and emergence regarding the absorptions, liberations, immersions, and attainments. | T: (7) “Again, the Tathāgata understands as it really is the defilement, the cleansing, and the emergence in regard to the jhānas, emancipations, concentrations, and meditative attainments. Since the Tathāgata understands as it really is the defilement, the cleansing, and the emergence in regard to the jhānas …
an10.21:9.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … | T: this too is a Tathāgata’s power that the Tathāgata has, on account of which … he sets in motion the brahma wheel.
an10.21:10.1 | S: Furthermore, the Realized One recollects many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. He remembers: ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ Thus he recollects his many past lives, with features and details. | T: (8) “Again, the Tathāgata recollects his manifold past abodes, that is, one birth, two births, three births, four births, five births, ten births, twenty births, thirty births, forty births, fifty births, a hundred births, a thousand births, a hundred thousand births, many eons of world-dissolution, many eons of world-evolution, many eons of world-dissolution and world-evolution thus: ‘There I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life span; passing away from there, I was reborn elsewhere, and there too I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life span; passing away from there, I was reborn here.’ Thus he recollects his manifold past abodes with their aspects and details. Since the Tathāgata recollects his manifold past abodes … with their aspects and details,
an10.21:10.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … | T: this too is a Tathāgata’s power that the Tathāgata has, on account of which … he sets in motion the brahma wheel.
an10.21:11.1 | S: Furthermore, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, the Realized One sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. He understands how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. ‘These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’ And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, he sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. He understands how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. | T: (9) “Again, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, the Tathāgata sees beings passing away and being reborn, inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and he understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma thus: ‘These beings who engaged in misconduct by body, speech, and mind, who reviled the noble ones, held wrong view, and undertook kamma based on wrong view, with the breakup of the body, after death, have been reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell; but these beings who engaged in good conduct by body, speech, and mind, who did not revile the noble ones, who held right view, and undertook kamma based on right view, with the breakup of the body, after death, have been reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.’ Thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, he sees beings passing away and being reborn, inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and he understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma. Since the Tathāgata … understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma,
an10.21:11.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … | T: this too is a Tathāgata’s power that the Tathāgata has, on account of which … he sets in motion the brahma wheel.
an10.21:12.1 | S: Furthermore, the Realized One has realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, and lives having realized it with his own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements. | T: (10) “Again, with the destruction of the taints, the Tathāgata has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it. Since the Tathāgata has realized for himself … the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom …
an10.21:12.2 | S: Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. … | T: this too is a Tathāgata’s power that the Tathāgata has,
an10.21:13.1 | S: These are the ten powers of a Realized One that the Realized One possesses. With these he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel.” | T: on account of which he claims the place of the chief bull, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and sets in motion the brahma wheel. “These, bhikkhus, are the ten Tathāgata’s powers that the Tathāgata has, possessing which he claims the place of the chief bull, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and sets in motion the brahma wheel.”

## an10.237
an10.237:1.1 | S: “For insight into greed, ten things should be developed. | T: “Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, ten things are to be developed.
an10.237:1.2 | S: What ten? | T: What ten?
an10.237:1.3 | S: The perceptions of ugliness, death, repulsiveness of food, dissatisfaction with the whole world, impermanence, suffering in impermanence, and not-self in suffering, giving up, fading away, and cessation. | T: The perception of unattractiveness, the perception of death, the perception of the repulsiveness of food, the perception of non-delight in the entire world, the perception of impermanence, the perception of suffering in the impermanent, the perception of non-self in what is suffering, the perception of abandoning, the perception of dispassion, and the perception of cessation.
an10.237:1.4 | S: For insight into greed, these ten things should be developed.” | T: For direct knowledge of lust, these ten things are to be developed.”

## an10.238
an10.238:1.1 | S: “For insight into greed, ten things should be developed. | T: “Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, ten things are to be developed.
an10.238:1.2 | S: What ten? | T: What ten?
an10.238:1.3 | S: The perceptions of impermanence, not-self, repulsiveness of food, dissatisfaction with the whole world, a skeleton, a worm-infested corpse, a livid corpse, a festering corpse,  a split open corpse, and a bloated corpse. | T: The perception of impermanence, the perception of non-self, the perception of the repulsiveness of food, the perception of non-delight in the entire world, the perception of a skeleton, the perception of a worm-infested corpse, the perception of a livid corpse, the perception of a festering corpse, the perception of a fissured corpse, and the perception of a bloated corpse.
an10.238:1.4 | S: For insight into greed, these ten things should be developed.” | T: For direct knowledge of lust, these ten things are to be developed.”

## an10.239
an10.239:1.1 | S: “For insight into greed, ten things should be developed. | T: “Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, ten things are to be developed.
an10.239:1.2 | S: What ten? | T: What ten?
an10.239:1.3 | S: Right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. | T: Right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right concentration, right knowledge, and right liberation.
an10.239:1.4 | S: For insight into greed, these ten things should be developed.” | T: For direct knowledge of lust, these ten things are to be developed.”

## an10.240-266
an10.240-266:1.1 | S: “For the complete understanding of greed … | T: “Bhikkhus, for full understanding of lust …
an10.240-266:1.2 | S: complete ending … | T: for the utter destruction …
an10.240-266:1.3 | S: giving up … | T: for the abandoning …
an10.240-266:1.4 | S: ending … | T: for the destruction …
an10.240-266:1.5 | S: vanishing … | T: for the vanishing …
an10.240-266:1.6 | S: fading away … | T: for the fading away …
an10.240-266:1.7 | S: cessation … | T: for the cessation …
an10.240-266:1.8 | S: giving away … | T: for the giving up …
an10.240-266:1.9 | S: letting go … | T: for the relinquishment of lust …
an10.240-266:1.10 | S: these ten things should be developed.” | T: these ten things are to be developed.”

## an10.30
an10.30:1.1 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
an10.30:1.2 | S: Now at that time King Pasenadi of Kosala returned from combat after winning a battle and succeeding in his strategy. | T: Now on that occasion King Pasenadi of Kosala had returned from the war front, victorious in battle, his purpose having been achieved.
an10.30:1.3 | S: Then King Pasenadi of Kosala went to the monastery. | T: Then King Pasenadi of Kosala set out for the park.
an10.30:1.4 | S: He went by carriage as far as the terrain allowed, then descended and entered the monastery on foot. | T: He went by carriage as far as the ground was suitable for a carriage, and then he dismounted from his carriage and entered the park on foot.
an10.30:1.5 | S: At that time several mendicants were walking mindfully in the open air. | T: Now on that occasion a number of bhikkhus were walking back and forth in the open air.
an10.30:1.6 | S: Then King Pasenadi of Kosala went up to them and said, | T: Then King Pasenadi of Kosala approached those bhikkhus and asked them:
an10.30:1.7 | S: “Sirs, where is the Blessed One at present, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha? | T: “Bhante, where is the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One now dwelling?
an10.30:1.8 | S: For I want to see the Buddha.” | T: For I wish to see the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.”
an10.30:1.9 | S: “Great king, that’s his dwelling, with the door closed. Approach it quietly, without hurrying; go onto the porch, clear your throat, and knock on the door-panel. The Buddha will open the door.” | T: “Great king, that is his dwelling with the closed door. Approach it quietly. Without hurrying, enter the porch, clear your throat, and tap on the bolt. The Blessed One will open the door for you.” Then, King Pasenadi of Kosala went quietly up to the dwelling with the closed door. Without hurrying, he entered the porch,
an10.30:2.1 | S: So the king approached the Buddha’s dwelling, cleared his throat and knocked on the door-panel, and the Buddha opened the door. | T: cleared his throat, and tapped on the bolt. The Blessed One opened the door.
an10.30:2.2 | S: Then King Pasenadi entered the Buddha’s dwelling. He bowed with his head to the Buddha’s feet, caressing them and covering them with kisses, and pronounced his name: | T: Then King Pasenadi of Kosala entered the dwelling, prostrated himself with his head at the Blessed One’s feet, and covered the Blessed One’s feet with kisses and caressed them with his hands, pronouncing his name:
an10.30:2.3 | S: “Sir, I am Pasenadi, king of Kosala! | T: “Bhante, I am King Pasenadi of Kosala!
an10.30:2.4 | S: I am Pasenadi, king of Kosala!” | T: Bhante, I am King Pasenadi of Kosala!”
an10.30:3.1 | S: “But, Great King, for what reason do you act with such utmost deference for this body, conveying your manifest love?” | T: “But, great king, what reasons do you have for showing such supreme honor to this body and displaying such an offering of loving-kindness?”
an10.30:3.2 | S: “Sir, it’s because of my gratitude and thanks for the Buddha that I act with such utmost deference, conveying my manifest love. | T: “Bhante, it is out of my gratitude and thankfulness that I show such supreme honor toward the Blessed One and display such an offering of loving-kindness to him.
an10.30:4.1 | S: The Buddha is practicing for the welfare and happiness of the people. He has established many people in the noble system, that is, the principles of goodness and skillfulness. | T: (1) “For, Bhante, the Blessed One is practicing for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people; he has established many people in the noble method, that is, in the way of the good Dhamma, in the way of the wholesome Dhamma.
an10.30:4.2 | S: This is a reason that I act with such utmost deference for the Buddha, conveying my manifest love. | T: This is one reason I show such supreme honor toward the Blessed One and display such an offering of loving-kindness to him.
an10.30:5.1 | S: Furthermore, the Buddha is ethical, possessing ethical conduct that is mature, noble, and skillful. | T: (2) “Again, Bhante, the Blessed One is virtuous, of mature behavior, of noble behavior, of wholesome behavior, possessing wholesome behavior.
an10.30:5.2 | S: This is another reason that I act with such utmost deference for the Buddha, conveying my manifest love. | T: This is another reason I show such supreme honor toward the Blessed One….
an10.30:6.1 | S: Furthermore, the Buddha lives in the wilderness, frequenting remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. | T: (3) “Again, Bhante, for a long time the Blessed One has been a forest-dweller who resorts to remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves.
an10.30:6.2 | S: This is another reason that I act with such utmost deference for the Buddha, conveying my manifest love. | T: Since that is so, this is another reason I show such supreme honor toward the Blessed One….
an10.30:7.1 | S: Furthermore, the Buddha is content with any kind of robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. | T: (4) “Again, Bhante, the Blessed One is content with any kind of robe, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and provisions for the sick.
an10.30:7.2 | S: This is another reason that I act with such utmost deference for the Buddha, conveying my manifest love. | T: This is another reason I show such supreme honor toward the Blessed One….
an10.30:8.1 | S: Furthermore, the Buddha is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with cupped palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world. | T: (5) “Again, Bhante, the Blessed One is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
an10.30:8.2 | S: This is another reason that I act with such utmost deference for the Buddha, conveying my manifest love. | T: This is another reason I show such supreme honor toward the Blessed One….
an10.30:9.1 | S: Furthermore, the Buddha gets to take part in talk about self-effacement that helps open the heart, when he wants, without trouble or difficulty. That is, talk about fewness of wishes, contentment, seclusion, aloofness, arousing energy, ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision of freedom. | T: (6) “Again, Bhante, the Blessed One gets to hear at will, without trouble or difficulty, talk concerned with the austere life that leads to the elimination of defilements, that is conducive to opening up the heart, that is, talk on fewness of desires, on contentment, on solitude, on not getting bound up with others, on arousing energy, on virtuous behavior, on concentration, on wisdom, on liberation, on the knowledge and vision of liberation.
an10.30:9.2 | S: This is another reason that I act with such utmost deference for the Buddha, conveying my manifest love. | T: This is another reason I show such supreme honor toward the Blessed One….
an10.30:10.1 | S: Furthermore, the Buddha gets the four absorptions—blissful meditations in this life that belong to the higher mind—when he wants, without trouble or difficulty. | T: (7) “Again, Bhante, the Blessed One gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life.
an10.30:10.2 | S: This is another reason that I act with such utmost deference for the Buddha, conveying my manifest love. | T: This is another reason I show such supreme honor toward the Blessed One….
an10.30:11.1 | S: Furthermore, the Buddha recollects many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. He remembers: ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ And so he recollects his many kinds of past lives, with features and details. | T: (8) “Again, Bhante, the Blessed One recollects his manifold past abodes, that is, one birth, two births, three births, four births, five births, ten births, twenty births, thirty births, forty births, fifty births, a hundred births, a thousand births, a hundred thousand births, many eons of world-dissolution, many eons of world-evolution, many eons of world-dissolution and world-evolution thus: ‘There I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life span; passing away from there, I was reborn elsewhere, and there too I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life span; passing away from there, I was reborn here.’ Thus he recollects his manifold past abodes with their aspects and details.
an10.30:11.2 | S: This is another reason that I act with such utmost deference for the Buddha, conveying my manifest love. | T: Since that is so, this is another reason I show such supreme honor toward the Blessed One….
an10.30:12.1 | S: Furthermore, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, the Buddha sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. He understands how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. ‘These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’ He understands how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. | T: (9) “Again, Bhante, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, the Blessed One sees beings passing away and being reborn, inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and he understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma thus: ‘These beings who engaged in misconduct by body, speech, and mind, who reviled the noble ones, held wrong view, and undertook kamma based on wrong view, with the breakup of the body, after death, have been reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell; but these beings who engaged in good conduct by body, speech, and mind, who did not revile the noble ones, who held right view, and undertook kamma based on right view, with the breakup of the body, after death, have been reborn in a good destination, in the heavenly world.’ Thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, he sees beings passing away and being reborn, inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and he understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma.
an10.30:12.2 | S: This is another reason that I act with such utmost deference for the Buddha, conveying my manifest love. | T: Since that is so, this is another reason I show such supreme honor toward the Blessed One….
an10.30:13.1 | S: Furthermore, the Buddha has realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, and lives having realized it with his own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements. | T: (10) “Again, Bhante, with the destruction of the taints, the Blessed One has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
an10.30:13.2 | S: This is another reason that I act with such utmost deference for the Buddha, conveying my manifest love. | T: Since that is so, this is another reason I show such supreme honor toward the Blessed One and display such an offering of loving-kindness to him.
an10.30:14.1 | S: Well, now, sir, I must go. | T: “And now, Bhante, we must be going.
an10.30:14.2 | S: I have many duties, and much to do.” | T: We are busy and have much to do.”
an10.30:14.3 | S: “Please, Great King, go at your convenience.” | T: “You may go, great king, at your own convenience.”
an10.30:14.4 | S: Then King Pasenadi rose from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving. | T: Then King Pasenadi of Kosala rose from his seat, paid homage to the Blessed One, circumambulated him keeping the right side toward him, and departed.

## an10.31
an10.31:1.1 | S: Then Venerable Upāli went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: | T: Then the Venerable Upāli approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and said to him:
an10.31:1.2 | S: “Sir, for how many reasons did the Realized One lay down training rules for his disciples and recite the monastic code?” | T: “Bhante, on how many grounds has the Tathāgata prescribed the training rules for his disciples and recited the Pātimokkha?”
an10.31:2.1 | S: “Upāli, the Realized One laid down training rules for his disciples and recited the monastic code for ten reasons. | T: “It is, Upāli, on ten grounds that the Tathāgata has prescribed the training rules for his disciples and recited the Pātimokkha.
an10.31:2.2 | S: What ten? | T: What ten?
an10.31:2.3 | S: For the well-being of the Saṅgha and for the comfort of the Saṅgha. For keeping difficult individuals in check and for the comfort of good-hearted mendicants. For restraining defilements that affect this life and protecting against defilements that affect lives to come. For inspiring confidence in those without it, and increasing confidence in those who have it. For the continuation of the true teaching and the support of the training. | T: (1) For the well-being of the Saṅgha; (2) for the ease of the Saṅgha; (3) for keeping recalcitrant persons in check; (4) so that well-behaved bhikkhus can dwell at ease; (5) for the restraint of taints pertaining to this present life; (6) for the dispelling of taints pertaining to future lives; (7) so that those without confidence might gain confidence; and (8) for increasing the confidence of those with confidence; (9) for the continuation of the good Dhamma; and (10) for promoting discipline.
an10.31:2.4 | S: The Realized One laid down training rules for his disciples and recited the monastic code for these ten reasons.” | T: “It is on these ten grounds that the Tathāgata has prescribed the training rules for his disciples and recited the Pātimokkha.”

## an10.32
an10.32:1.1 | S: “Sir, how many grounds are there to suspend the recitation of the monastic code?” | T: “Bhante, how many reasons are there for suspending the Pātimokkha?”
an10.32:1.2 | S: “Upāli, there are ten grounds to suspend the recitation of the monastic code. | T: “There are, Upāli, ten reasons for suspending the Pātimokkha.
an10.32:1.3 | S: What ten? | T: What ten?
an10.32:1.4 | S: A mendicant who has committed an expulsion offense is sitting in the assembly. A discussion about whether someone has committed an expulsion offense is unfinished. Someone who is not fully ordained is sitting in the assembly. A discussion about whether someone is fully ordained or not is unfinished. Someone who has resigned the training is sitting in the assembly. A discussion about whether someone has resigned the training or not is unfinished. A eunuch is sitting in the assembly. A discussion about whether someone is a eunuch is unfinished. A raper of nuns is sitting in the assembly. A discussion about whether or not someone is a raper of nuns is unfinished. | T: (1) One who has committed a pārājika is sitting in that assembly; (2) a discussion about one who has committed a pārājika is underway; (3) one not fully ordained is sitting in that assembly; (4) a discussion about one not fully ordained is underway; (5) one who has given up the training is sitting in that assembly; (6) a discussion about one who has given up the training is underway; (7) a eunuch is sitting in that assembly; (8) a discussion about a eunuch is underway; (9) a seducer of a bhikkhunī is sitting in that assembly; (10) a discussion about a seducer of a bhikkhunī is underway.
an10.32:1.5 | S: These are the ten grounds to suspend the recitation of the monastic code.” | T: These are the ten reasons for suspending the Pātimokkha.”

## an10.33
an10.33:1.1 | S: “Sir, how many qualities should a mendicant have to be deemed a judge?” | T: “Bhante, how many qualities should a bhikkhu possess to be agreed upon to adjudicate in a disciplinary issue?”
an10.33:1.2 | S: “Upāli, a mendicant should have ten qualities to be deemed a judge. | T: “A bhikkhu who possesses ten qualities, Upāli, may be agreed upon to adjudicate in a disciplinary issue.
an10.33:1.3 | S: What ten? | T: What ten?
an10.33:1.4 | S: It’s when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. | T: (1) Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults. Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
an10.33:1.5 | S: They’re very learned, remembering and keeping what they’ve learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and penetrating them theoretically. | T: (2) He has learned much, remembers what he has learned, and accumulates what he has learned. Those teachings that are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing, which proclaim the perfectly complete and pure spiritual life—such teachings as these he has learned much of, retained in mind, recited verbally, investigated mentally, and penetrated well by view.
an10.33:1.6 | S: Both monastic codes have been passed down to them in detail, well analyzed, well mastered, well evaluated in both the rules and accompanying material. | T: (3) Both Pātimokkhas have been well transmitted to him in detail, well analyzed, well mastered, well determined in terms of the rules and their detailed explication.
an10.33:1.7 | S: They’re firm and unfaltering in the training. | T: (4) He is firm in the discipline, immovable.
an10.33:1.8 | S: When there are opposing parties, they’re able to persuade, advocate, and convince them, make them see the other side and trust each other. | T: (5) He is able to convince those on both sides of the issue, to describe matters to them, to persuade them, to demonstrate to them, and to placate them.
an10.33:1.9 | S: They’re skilled in the instigation and settlement of disciplinary issues. | T: (6) He is skilled in the origination and settlement of disciplinary issues.
an10.33:1.10 | S: They know what a disciplinary issue is. | T: (7) He knows what a disciplinary issue is.
an10.33:1.11 | S: They know how a disciplinary issue originates. | T: (8) He knows the origin of a disciplinary issue.
an10.33:1.12 | S: They know how a disciplinary issue ceases. | T: (9) He knows the cessation of a disciplinary issue.
an10.33:1.13 | S: They know the practical way leading to the cessation of a disciplinary issue. | T: (10) He knows the way leading to the cessation of a disciplinary issue.
an10.33:1.14 | S: A mendicant should possess these ten qualities to be deemed a judge.” | T: A bhikkhu who possesses these ten qualities may be agreed upon to adjudicate in a disciplinary issue.”

## an10.34
an10.34:1.1 | S: “Sir, how many qualities should a mendicant have to give ordination?” | T: “Bhante, how many qualities should a bhikkhu possess to give full ordination?”
an10.34:1.2 | S: “Upāli, a mendicant should have ten qualities to give ordination. | T: “A bhikkhu who possesses ten qualities, Upāli, may give full ordination.
an10.34:1.3 | S: What ten? | T: What ten?
an10.34:1.4 | S: It’s when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. | T: (1) Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous … he trains in them.
an10.34:1.5 | S: They’re very learned, remembering and keeping what they’ve learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and penetrating them theoretically. | T: (2) He has learned much … and penetrated well by view.
an10.34:1.6 | S: Both monastic codes have been passed down to them in detail, well analyzed, well mastered, well evaluated in both the rules and accompanying material. | T: (3) Both Pātimokkhas have been well transmitted to him in detail, well analyzed, well mastered, well determined in terms of the rules and their detailed explication.
an10.34:1.7 | S: They’re able to care for the sick or get someone else to do so. | T: (4) He is able to look after a patient or to get someone else to look after him.
an10.34:1.8 | S: They’re able to settle dissatisfaction or get someone else to do so. | T: (5) He is able to eliminate one’s dissatisfaction or to get someone else to eliminate it.
an10.34:1.9 | S: They’re able to dispel remorse when it has come up. | T: (6) He is able to use the Dhamma to dispel regrets that might arise in his pupils.
an10.34:1.10 | S: They’re able to rationally dissuade someone from misconceptions that come up. | T: (7) He is able to dissuade them, by way of the Dhamma, from erroneous views that have arisen.
an10.34:1.11 | S: They’re able to encourage someone in the higher ethics, | T: (8) He is able to encourage them in the higher virtuous behavior.
an10.34:1.12 | S: the higher mind, | T: (9) He is able to encourage them in the higher mind.
an10.34:1.13 | S: and the higher wisdom. | T: (10) He is able to encourage them in the higher wisdom.
an10.34:1.14 | S: A mendicant should possess these ten qualities to give ordination.” | T: A bhikkhu who possesses these ten qualities may give full ordination.”

## an10.37
an10.37:1.1 | S: “Sir, they speak of ‘schism in the Saṅgha’. | T: “Bhante, it is said: ‘Schism in the Saṅgha, schism in the Saṅgha.’
an10.37:1.2 | S: How is schism in the Saṅgha defined?” | T: How, Bhante, is there schism in the Saṅgha?”
an10.37:1.3 | S: “Upāli, it’s when a mendicant explains what is not the teaching as the teaching, and what is the teaching as not the teaching. They explain what is not the training as the training, and what is the training as not the training. They explain what was not spoken and stated by the Realized One as spoken and stated by the Realized One, and what was spoken and stated by the Realized One as not spoken and stated by the Realized One. They explain what was not practiced by the Realized One as practiced by the Realized One, and what was practiced by the Realized One as not practiced by the Realized One. They explain what was not prescribed by the Realized One as prescribed by the Realized One, and what was prescribed by the Realized One as not prescribed by the Realized One. | T: “Here, Upāli, (1) bhikkhus explain non-Dhamma as Dhamma, (2) and Dhamma as non-Dhamma. (3) They explain non-discipline as discipline, and (4) discipline as non-discipline. (5) They explain what has not been stated and uttered by the Tathāgata as having been stated and uttered by him, and (6) what has been stated and uttered by the Tathāgata as not having been stated and uttered by him. (7) They explain what has not been practiced by the Tathāgata as having been practiced by him, and (8) what has been practiced by the Tathāgata as not having been practiced by him. (9) They explain what has not been prescribed by the Tathāgata as having been prescribed by him, and (10) what has been prescribed by the Tathāgata as not having been prescribed by him.
an10.37:1.4 | S: On these ten grounds they split off and go their own way. They perform legal acts autonomously and recite the monastic code autonomously. | T: On these ten grounds they withdraw and go apart. They perform legal acts separately and recite the Pātimokkha separately. It is in this way,
an10.37:1.5 | S: That is how schism in the Saṅgha is defined.” | T: Upāli, that there is schism in the Saṅgha.”

## an10.38
an10.38:1.1 | S: “Sir, they speak of ‘harmony in the Saṅgha’. | T: “Bhante, it is said: ‘Concord in the Saṅgha, concord in the Saṅgha.’
an10.38:1.2 | S: How is harmony in the Saṅgha defined?” | T: How is there concord in the Saṅgha?”
an10.38:1.3 | S: “Upāli, it’s when a mendicant explains what is not the teaching as not the teaching, and what is the teaching as the teaching. They explain what is not the training as not the training, and what is the training as the training. They explain what was not spoken and stated by the Realized One as not spoken and stated by the Realized One, and what was spoken and stated by the Realized One as spoken and stated by the Realized One. They explain what was not practiced by the Realized One as not practiced by the Realized One, and what was practiced by the Realized One as practiced by the Realized One. They explain what was not prescribed by the Realized One as not prescribed by the Realized One, and what was prescribed by the Realized One as prescribed by the Realized One. | T: “Here, Upāli, (1) bhikkhus explain non-Dhamma as non-Dhamma, and (2) Dhamma as Dhamma. (3) They explain non-discipline as non-discipline, and (4) discipline as discipline. (5) They explain what has not been stated and uttered by the Tathāgata as not having been stated and uttered by him, and (6) what has been stated and uttered by the Tathāgata as having been stated and uttered by him. (7) They explain what has not been practiced by the Tathāgata as not having been practiced by him, and (8) what has been practiced by the Tathāgata as having been practiced by him. (9) They explain what has not been prescribed by the Tathāgata as not having been prescribed by him, and (10) what has been prescribed by the Tathāgata as having been prescribed by him.
an10.38:1.4 | S: On these ten grounds they don’t split off and go their own way. They don’t perform legal acts autonomously or recite the monastic code autonomously. | T: On these ten grounds, they do not withdraw and go apart. They do not perform legal acts separately or recite the Pātimokkha separately. It is in this way,
an10.38:1.5 | S: That is how harmony in the Saṅgha is defined.” | T: Upāli, that there is concord in the Saṅgha.”

## an10.3
an10.3:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a vital condition for having no regrets. | T: “Bhikkhus, (1) for an immoral person, for one deficient in virtuous behavior, (2) non-regret lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:1.2 | S: When there are regrets, one who has regrets has destroyed a vital condition for joy. | T: When there is no non-regret, for one deficient in non-regret, (3) joy lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:1.3 | S: When there is no joy, one who lacks joy has destroyed a vital condition for rapture. | T: When there is no joy, for one deficient in joy, (4) rapture lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:1.4 | S: When there is no rapture, one who lacks rapture has destroyed a vital condition for tranquility. | T: When there is no rapture, for one deficient in rapture, (5) tranquility lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:1.5 | S: When there is no tranquility, one who lacks tranquility has destroyed a vital condition for bliss. | T: When there is no tranquility, for one deficient in tranquility, (6) pleasure lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:1.6 | S: When there is no bliss, one who lacks bliss has destroyed a vital condition for right immersion. | T: When there is no pleasure, for one deficient in pleasure, (7) right concentration lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:1.7 | S: When there is no right immersion, one who lacks right immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true knowledge and vision. | T: When there is no right concentration, for one deficient in right concentration, (8) the knowledge and vision of things as they really are lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:1.8 | S: When there is no true knowledge and vision, one who lacks true knowledge and vision has destroyed a vital condition for disillusionment and dispassion. | T: When there is no knowledge and vision of things as they really are, for one deficient in the knowledge and vision of things as they really are, (9) disenchantment and dispassion lack their proximate cause.
an10.3:1.9 | S: When there is no disillusionment and dispassion, one who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom. | T: When there is no disenchantment and dispassion, for one deficient in disenchantment and dispassion, (10) the knowledge and vision of liberation lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:1.10 | S: Suppose there was a tree that lacked branches and foliage. Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would not grow to fullness. | T: “Suppose there is a tree deficient in branches and foliage. Then its shoots do not grow to fullness; also its bark, softwood, and heartwood do not grow to fullness.
an10.3:1.11 | S: In the same way, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a vital condition for having no regrets. | T: So too, for an immoral person, one deficient in virtuous behavior, non-regret lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:1.12 | S: When there are regrets, one who has regrets has destroyed a vital condition for joy. … | T: When there is no non-regret …
an10.3:1.13 | S: One who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom. | T: the knowledge and vision of liberation lacks its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.1 | S: An ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital condition for not having regrets. | T: “Bhikkhus, (1) for a virtuous person, for one whose behavior is virtuous, (2) non-regret possesses its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.2 | S: When there are no regrets, one who has no regrets has fulfilled a vital condition for joy. | T: When there is non-regret, for one possessing non-regret, (3) joy possesses its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.3 | S: When there is joy, one who has fulfilled joy has fulfilled a vital condition for rapture. | T: When there is joy, for one possessing joy, (4) rapture possesses its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.4 | S: When there is rapture, one who has fulfilled rapture has fulfilled a vital condition for tranquility. | T: When there is rapture, for one possessing rapture, (5) tranquility possesses its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.5 | S: When there is tranquility, one who has fulfilled tranquility has fulfilled a vital condition for bliss. | T: When there is tranquility, for one possessing tranquility, (6) pleasure possesses its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.6 | S: When there is bliss, one who has fulfilled bliss has fulfilled a vital condition for right immersion. | T: When there is pleasure, for one possessing pleasure, (7) right concentration possesses its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.7 | S: When there is right immersion, one who has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital condition for true knowledge and vision. | T: When there is right concentration, for one possessing right concentration, (8) the knowledge and vision of things as they really are possesses its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.8 | S: When there is true knowledge and vision, one who has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has fulfilled a vital condition for disillusionment and dispassion. | T: When there is the knowledge and vision of things as they really are, for one possessing the knowledge and vision of things as they really are, (9) disenchantment and dispassion possess their proximate cause.
an10.3:2.9 | S: When there is disillusionment and dispassion, one who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom. | T: When there is disenchantment and dispassion, for one possessing disenchantment and dispassion, (10) the knowledge and vision of liberation possesses its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.10 | S: Suppose there was a tree that was complete with branches and foliage. Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would grow to fullness. | T: “Suppose there is a tree possessing branches and foliage. Then its shoots grow to fullness; also its bark, softwood, and heartwood grow to fullness.
an10.3:2.11 | S: In the same way, an ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital condition for not having regrets. | T: So too, for a virtuous person, one whose behavior is virtuous, non-regret possesses its proximate cause.
an10.3:2.12 | S: When there are no regrets, one who has no regrets has fulfilled a vital condition for joy. … | T: When there is non-regret …
an10.3:2.13 | S: One who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.” | T: the knowledge and vision of liberation possesses its proximate cause.”

