## dn12, continued
dn12:13.8 | S: An individual with wrong view is reborn in one of two places, I say: | T: For one of wrong view, I tell you, there is one of two destinations:
dn12:13.9 | S: hell or the animal realm. | T: either hell or the animal womb.
dn12:14.1 | P: Iti kira, lohicca, yo evaṁ vadeyya: | T: “And if anyone were to say,
dn12:14.2 | P: ‘rājā pasenadi kosalo kāsikosalaṁ ajjhāvasati; | T: ‘King Pasenadi Kosala reigns over Kāsi & Kosala.
dn12:14.3 | P: yā kāsikosale samudayasañjāti, rājāva taṁ pasenadi kosalo ekako paribhuñjeyya, na aññesaṁ dadeyyā’ti. | T: He alone should consume the fruits & revenues of Kāsi & Kosala, and not share them with others,’
dn12:15.1 | P: Evaṁvādī so ye rājānaṁ pasenadiṁ kosalaṁ upajīvanti tumhe ceva aññe ca, tesaṁ antarāyakaro hoti. | T: he, speaking in this way, would be a creator of obstacles for King Pasenadi’s subjects—you & others.
dn12:15.2 | P: Antarāyakaro samāno ahitānukampī hoti, ahitānukampissa sapattakaṁ cittaṁ paccupaṭṭhitaṁ hoti, sapattake citte paccupaṭṭhite micchādiṭṭhi hoti. | T: Being a creator of obstacles, he would not be sympathetic for their welfare. In one not sympathetic for their welfare, the mind would be established in animosity for them. When the mind is established in animosity, there is wrong view. For one of wrong view, I tell you, there is one of two destinations: either hell or the animal womb.
dn12:15.3 | P: Evameva kho, lohicca, yo evaṁ vadeyya: | T: “In the same way, if anyone were to say,
dn12:15.4 | P: ‘idha samaṇo vā brāhmaṇo vā kusalaṁ dhammaṁ adhigaccheyya, kusalaṁ dhammaṁ adhigantvā na parassa āroceyya, kiñhi paro parassa karissati. | T: ‘Suppose that a contemplative or brahman were to arrive at a skillful Dhamma. Having arrived at a skillful Dhamma, he should not declare it to anyone else, for what can one person do for another?
dn12:15.5 | P: Seyyathāpi nāma …pe… | T: It would be just the same as if, having cut through an old bond, one were to make another new bond. I say that such a thing is an evil, greedy deed,
dn12:15.6 | P: kiñhi paro parassa karissatī’ti. | T: for what can one person do for another?’—
dn12:15.7 | P: Evaṁvādī so ye te kulaputtā tathāgatappaveditaṁ dhammavinayaṁ āgamma evarūpaṁ uḷāraṁ visesaṁ adhigacchanti, sotāpattiphalampi sacchikaronti, sakadāgāmiphalampi sacchikaronti, anāgāmiphalampi sacchikaronti, arahattampi sacchikaronti. | T: he, speaking in this way, would be a creator of obstacles for those children of good family who, coming to the Dhamma & Vinaya revealed by the Tathāgata, attain the sort of grand distinction where they attain the fruit of stream-entry, the fruit of once-returning, the fruit of non-returning, the fruit of arahantship;
dn12:15.8 | P: Ye cime dibbā gabbhā paripācenti dibbānaṁ bhavānaṁ abhinibbattiyā, tesaṁ antarāyakaro hoti, | T: and also for those who ripen deva wombs for the sake of bringing about the deva state.
dn12:15.9 | P: antarāyakaro samāno ahitānukampī hoti, ahitānukampissa sapattakaṁ cittaṁ paccupaṭṭhitaṁ hoti, sapattake citte paccupaṭṭhite micchādiṭṭhi hoti. | T: Being a creator of obstacles, he would not be sympathetic for their welfare. In one not sympathetic for their welfare, the mind would be established in animosity for them. When the mind is established in animosity, there is wrong view.
dn12:15.10 | P: Micchādiṭṭhissa kho ahaṁ, lohicca, dvinnaṁ gatīnaṁ aññataraṁ gatiṁ vadāmi— | T: For one of wrong view, I tell you, there is one of two destinations:
dn12:15.11 | P: nirayaṁ vā tiracchānayoniṁ vā. | T: either hell or the animal womb.
dn12:16.0 | S: 2. Three Teachers Who Deserve to Be Reprimanded | T: (none)
dn12:16.1 | S: Lohicca, there are three kinds of teachers in the world who deserve to be reprimanded. | T: “Lohicca, there are these three sorts of teacher who are worthy of criticism in the world,
dn12:16.2 | S: When someone reprimands such teachers, the reprimand is true, correct, legitimate, and blameless. | T: and when anyone criticizes these sorts of teachers, the criticism is true, factual, righteous, & unblameworthy.
dn12:16.3 | S: What three? | T: Which three?
dn12:16.4 | S: Firstly, take a teacher who has not reached the goal of the ascetic life for which they went forth from the lay life to homelessness. | T: “There is the case where a certain teacher has not attained the goal of the contemplative life for which one goes forth from the home life into homelessness.
dn12:16.5 | S: They teach their disciples: | T: He, not having attained that goal of the contemplative life, teaches his disciples,
dn12:16.6 | S: ‘This is for your welfare. This is for your happiness.’ | T: ‘This is for your welfare. This is for your happiness.’
dn12:16.7 | S: But their disciples don’t want to listen. They don’t actively listen or try to understand. They proceed having turned away from the teacher’s instruction. | T: His disciples don’t listen, don’t lend ear, don’t put forth an intent for gnosis. They practice in a way deviating from the teacher’s instructions.
dn12:16.8 | S: That teacher deserves to be reprimanded: | T: He should be criticized, saying,
dn12:16.9 | S: ‘Venerable, you haven’t reached the goal of the ascetic life; and when you teach disciples | T: ‘You, venerable sir, have not attained the goal of the contemplative life for which one goes forth from the home life into homelessness. Not having attained that goal of the contemplative life, you teach your disciples,
dn12:16.10 | P: “idaṁ vo hitāya idaṁ vo sukhāyā”ti. | T: “This is for your welfare. This is for your happiness.”
dn12:16.11 | S: they proceed having turned away from the teacher’s instruction. | T: Your disciples don’t listen, don’t lend ear, don’t put forth an intent for gnosis, and practice in a way deviating from the teacher’s instructions.
dn12:16.12 | S: It’s like a man who makes advances on a woman though she pulls away, or embraces her though she turns her back. | T: It’s just as if a man were to pursue (a woman) who pulls away, or to embrace one who turns her back.
dn12:16.13 | S: That’s the consequence of such a wicked, greedy deed, I say. For what can one do for another?’ | T: I say that such a thing is an evil, greedy deed, for what can one person do for another?’
dn12:16.14 | P: kiñhi paro parassa karissatī’ti. | T: (none)
dn12:16.15 | S: This is the first kind of teacher who deserves to be reprimanded. | T: This is the first teacher who is worthy of criticism in the world,
dn12:16.16 | P: yo ca panevarūpaṁ satthāraṁ codeti, sā codanā bhūtā tacchā dhammikā anavajjā. | T: and when anyone criticizes this sort of teacher, the criticism is true, factual, righteous, & unblameworthy.
dn12:17.1 | S: Furthermore, take a teacher who has not reached the goal of the ascetic life for which they went forth from the lay life to homelessness. | T: “And further, there is the case where a certain teacher has not attained the goal of the contemplative life for which one goes forth from the home life into homelessness.
dn12:17.2 | S: They teach their disciples: | T: He, not having attained that goal of the contemplative life, teaches his disciples,
dn12:17.3 | S: ‘This is for your welfare. This is for your happiness.’ | T: ‘This is for your welfare. This is for your happiness.’
dn12:17.4 | S: Their disciples do want to listen. They actively listen and try to understand. They don’t proceed having turned away from the teacher’s instruction. | T: His disciples listen, lend ear, put forth an intent for gnosis, and practice in a way not deviating from the teacher’s instructions.
dn12:17.5 | S: That teacher deserves to be reprimanded: | T: He should be criticized, saying,
dn12:17.6 | S: ‘Venerable, you haven’t reached the goal of the ascetic life; and when you teach disciples | T: ‘You, venerable sir, have not attained the goal of the contemplative life for which one goes forth from the home life into homelessness. Not having attained that goal of the contemplative life, you teach your disciples,
dn12:17.7 | P: “idaṁ vo hitāya, idaṁ vo sukhāyā”ti. | T: “This is for your welfare. This is for your happiness.”
dn12:17.8 | S: they don’t proceed having turned away from the teacher’s instruction. | T: Your disciples listen, lend ear, put forth an intent for gnosis, and practice in a way not deviating from the teacher’s instructions.
dn12:17.9 | S: It’s like someone who abandons their own field and presumes to weed someone else’s field. That’s the consequence of such a wicked, greedy deed, I say. For what can one do for another?’ | T: It’s just as if a man, neglecting his own field, were to imagine that another’s field should be weeded. I say that such a thing is an evil, greedy deed, for what can one person do for another?’
dn12:17.10 | S: This is the second kind of teacher who deserves to be reprimanded. | T: This is the second teacher who is worthy of criticism in the world,
dn12:17.11 | P: yo ca panevarūpaṁ satthāraṁ codeti, sā codanā bhūtā tacchā dhammikā anavajjā. | T: and when anyone criticizes this sort of teacher, the criticism is true, factual, righteous, & unblameworthy.
dn12:18.1 | S: Furthermore, take a teacher who has reached the goal of the ascetic life for which they went forth from the lay life to homelessness. | T: “And further, there is the case where a certain teacher has attained the goal of the contemplative life for which one goes forth from the home life into homelessness.
dn12:18.2 | S: They teach their disciples: | T: He, having attained that goal of the contemplative life, teaches his disciples,
dn12:18.3 | S: ‘This is for your welfare. This is for your happiness.’ | T: ‘This is for your welfare. This is for your happiness.’
dn12:18.4 | S: But their disciples don’t want to listen. They don’t actively listen or try to understand. They proceed having turned away from the teacher’s instruction. | T: His disciples don’t listen, don’t lend ear, don’t put forth an intent for gnosis. They practice in a way deviating from the teacher’s instructions.
dn12:18.5 | S: That teacher deserves to be reprimanded: | T: He should be criticized, saying,
dn12:18.6 | S: ‘Venerable, you have reached the goal of the ascetic life; yet when you teach disciples | T: ‘You, venerable sir, have attained the goal of the contemplative life for which one goes forth from the home life into homelessness.
dn12:18.7 | P: Taṁ tvaṁ sāmaññatthaṁ anupāpuṇitvā sāvakānaṁ dhammaṁ desesi: | T: Having attained that goal of the contemplative life, you teach your disciples,
dn12:18.8 | P: “idaṁ vo hitāya, idaṁ vo sukhāyā”ti. | T: “This is for your welfare. This is for your happiness,”
dn12:18.9 | S: they proceed having turned away from the teacher’s instruction. | T: but your disciples don’t listen, don’t lend ear, don’t put forth an intent for gnosis, and practice in a way deviating from the teacher’s instructions.
dn12:18.10 | S: Suppose someone cut off an old bond, only to create another new bond. | T: It’s just as if, having cut through an old bond, one were to make another new bond.
dn12:18.11 | S: That’s the consequence of such a wicked, greedy deed, I say. For what can one person do for another?’ | T: I say that such a thing is an evil, greedy deed, for what can one person do for another?’
dn12:18.12 | S: This is the third kind of teacher who deserves to be reprimanded. | T: This is the third teacher who is worthy of criticism in the world,
dn12:18.13 | P: yo ca panevarūpaṁ satthāraṁ codeti, sā codanā bhūtā tacchā dhammikā anavajjā. | T: and when anyone criticizes this sort of teacher, the criticism is true, factual, righteous, & unblameworthy.”
dn12:18.14 | S: These are the three kinds of teachers in the world who deserve to be reprimanded. | T: (none)
dn12:18.15 | S: When someone reprimands such teachers, the reprimand is true, correct, legitimate, and blameless.” | T: (none)
dn12:19.0 | S: 3. A Teacher Who Does Not Deserve to Be Reprimanded | T: (none)
dn12:19.1 | S: When he had spoken, Lohicca said to the Buddha, | T: When this was said, the brahman Lohicca said to the Blessed One,
dn12:19.2 | S: “But worthy Gotama, is there a teacher in the world who does not deserve to be reprimanded?” | T: “But is there, Master Gotama, any teacher who is not worthy of criticism in the world?”
dn12:19.3 | S: “There is, Lohicca.” | T: “There is, Lohicca, a teacher who is not worthy of criticism in the world.”
dn12:19.4 | S: “But who is that teacher?” | T: “But which teacher, Master Gotama, is not worthy of criticism in the world?”
dn12:20-55.1 | S: “It’s when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully awakened Buddha … | T: “There is the case, Lohicca, where a Tathāgata appears in the world, worthy & rightly self-awakened. He teaches the Dhamma admirable in its beginning, admirable in its middle, admirable in its end. He proclaims the holy life both in its particulars & in its essence, entirely perfect, surpassingly pure. “A householder or householder’s son, hearing the Dhamma, gains conviction in the Tathāgata and reflects: ‘Household life is confining, a dusty path. The life gone forth is like the open air. It is not easy living at home to practice the holy life totally perfect, totally pure, like a polished shell. What if I were to shave off my hair & beard, put on the ochre robes, and go forth from the household life into homelessness?’ “So after some time he abandons his mass of wealth, large or small; leaves his circle of relatives, large or small; shaves off his hair & beard, puts on the ochre robes, and goes forth from the household life into homelessness. “When he has thus gone forth, he lives restrained by the rules of the monastic code, seeing danger in the slightest faults.
dn12:20-55.2 | S: That’s how a mendicant is accomplished in ethics. … | T: Consummate in his virtue, he guards the doors of his senses, is possessed of mindfulness & alertness, and is content [for details, see DN2] … Abandoning the Hindrances “Endowed with this noble aggregate of virtue, this noble restraint over the sense faculties, this noble mindfulness & alertness, and this noble contentment, he seeks out a secluded dwelling: a wilderness, the shade of a tree, a mountain, a glen, a hillside cave, a charnel ground, a forest grove, the open air, a heap of straw. After his meal, returning from his alms round, he sits down, crosses his legs, holds his body erect, and brings mindfulness to the fore. “Abandoning covetousness with regard to the world, he dwells with an awareness devoid of covetousness. He cleanses his mind of covetousness. Abandoning ill will & anger, he dwells with an awareness devoid of ill will, sympathetic with the welfare of all living beings. He cleanses his mind of ill will & anger. Abandoning sloth & drowsiness, he dwells with an awareness devoid of sloth & drowsiness, mindful, alert, percipient of light. He cleanses his mind of sloth & drowsiness. Abandoning restlessness & anxiety, he dwells undisturbed, his mind inwardly stilled. He cleanses his mind of restlessness & anxiety. Abandoning uncertainty, he dwells having crossed over uncertainty, with no perplexity with regard to skillful mental qualities. He cleanses his mind of uncertainty. “Suppose that a man, taking a loan, invests it in his business affairs. His business affairs succeed. He repays his old debts and there is extra left over for maintaining his wife. The thought would occur to him, ‘Before, taking a loan, I invested it in my business affairs. Now my business affairs have succeeded. I have repaid my old debts and there is extra left over for maintaining my wife.’ Because of that he would experience joy & happiness. “Now suppose that a man falls sick—in pain & seriously ill. He does not enjoy his meals, and there is no strength in his body. As time passes, he eventually recovers from that sickness. He enjoys his meals and there is strength in his body. The thought would occur to him, ‘Before, I was sick....Now I am recovered from that sickness. I enjoy my meals and there is strength in my body.’ Because of that he would experience joy & happiness. “Now suppose that a man is bound in prison. As time passes, he eventually is released from that bondage, safe & sound, with no loss of property. The thought would occur to him, ‘Before, I was bound in prison. Now I am released from that bondage, safe & sound, with no loss of my property.’ Because of that he would experience joy & happiness. “Now suppose that a man is a slave, subject to others, not subject to himself, unable to go where he likes. As time passes, he eventually is released from that slavery, subject to himself, not subject to others, freed, able to go where he likes. The thought would occur to him, ‘Before, I was a slave.… Now I am released from that slavery, subject to myself, not subject to others, freed, able to go where I like.’ Because of that he would experience joy & happiness. “Now suppose that a man, carrying money & goods, is traveling by a road through desolate country. As time passes, he eventually emerges from that desolate country, safe & sound, with no loss of property. The thought would occur to him, ‘Before, carrying money & goods, I was traveling by a road through desolate country. Now I have emerged from that desolate country, safe & sound, with no loss of my property.’ Because of that he would experience joy & happiness. “In the same way, when these five hindrances are not abandoned in himself, the monk regards it as a debt, a sickness, a prison, slavery, a road through desolate country. But when these five hindrances are abandoned in himself, he regards it as unindebtedness, good health, release from prison, freedom, a place of security. When he sees that they have been abandoned within him, gladness is born. In one who is gladdened, rapture is born. Enraptured at heart, his body grows calm. His body calm, he is sensitive to pleasure. Feeling pleasure, his mind becomes concentrated.
dn12:20-55.3 | S: They enter and remain in the first absorption … | T: The Four Jhānas “Quite secluded from sensuality, secluded from unskillful qualities, he enters and remains in the first jhāna: rapture & pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by directed thought & evaluation. He permeates & pervades, suffuses & fills this very body with the rapture & pleasure born from withdrawal. Just as if a dexterous bathman or bathman’s apprentice would pour bath powder into a brass basin and knead it together, sprinkling it again & again with water, so that his ball of bath powder—saturated, moisture-laden, permeated within & without—would nevertheless not drip; even so, the monk permeates… this very body with the rapture & pleasure born of seclusion. There is nothing of his entire body unpervaded by rapture & pleasure born of seclusion.
dn12:20-55.4 | S: A teacher under whom a disciple achieves such a high distinction is one who does not deserve to be reprimanded. | T: “When a disciple of a teacher attains this sort of grand distinction, Lohicca, that is a teacher not worthy of criticism in the world,
dn12:20-55.5 | S: When someone reprimands such a teacher, the reprimand is false, baseless, illegitimate, and blameworthy. | T: and if anyone were to criticize this sort of teacher, the criticism would be false, unfactual, unrighteous, & blameworthy.
dn12:56-62.1 | P: …pe… | T: (none)
dn12:56-62.2 | S: They enter and remain in the second absorption … | T: “And further, with the stilling of directed thought & evaluation, he enters & remains in the second jhāna…
dn12:56-62.3 | S: third absorption … | T: the third jhāna…
dn12:56-62.4 | S: fourth absorption. | T: the fourth jhāna: purity of equanimity & mindfulness, neither pleasure nor pain. He sits, permeating the body with a pure, bright awareness. Just as if a man were sitting covered from head to foot with a white cloth so that there would be no part of his body to which the white cloth did not extend; even so, the monk sits, permeating the body with a pure, bright awareness. There is nothing of his entire body unpervaded by pure, bright awareness.
dn12:56-62.5 | S: A teacher under whom a disciple achieves such a high distinction is one who does not deserve to be reprimanded. … | T: “When a disciple of a teacher attains this sort of grand distinction, Lohicca, that is a teacher not worthy of criticism in the world, and if anyone were to criticize this sort of teacher, the criticism would be false, unfactual, unrighteous, & blameworthy.
dn12:63-77.1 | P: …pe… | T: (none)
dn12:63-77.2 | S: They project and extend the mind toward knowledge and vision … | T: Insight Knowledge, etc. “With his mind thus concentrated, purified, & bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, & attained to imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to knowledge & vision… to creating a mind-made body… to the modes of supranormal powers… to the divine ear-element… to knowledge of the awareness of other beings… to knowledge of the recollection of past lives… to knowledge of the passing away & re-appearance of beings… to the knowledge of the ending of effluents. He discerns, as it is has come to be, that ‘This is stress… This is the origination of stress… This is the cessation of stress… This is the way leading to the cessation of stress… These are effluents… This is the origination of effluents… This is the cessation of effluents… This is the way leading to the cessation of effluents.’ His heart, thus knowing, thus seeing, is released from the effluent of sensuality, the effluent of becoming, the effluent of ignorance. With release, there is the knowledge, ‘Released.’ He discerns that ‘Birth is ended, the holy life fulfilled, the task done. There is nothing further for this world.’ “Just as if there were a pool of water in a mountain glen—clear, limpid, & unsullied—where a man with good eyesight standing on the bank could see shells, gravel, & pebbles, and also shoals of fish swimming about & resting, and it would occur to him, ‘This pool of water is clear, limpid, & unsullied. Here are these shells, gravel, & pebbles, and also these shoals of fish swimming about & resting.’ In the same way—with his mind thus concentrated, purified, & bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, & attained to imperturbability—the monk directs & inclines it to the knowledge of the ending of effluents. He discerns, as it has come to be, that ‘This is stress… This is the origination of stress… This is the cessation of stress… This is the way leading to the cessation of stress… These are effluents… This is the origination of effluents… This is the cessation of effluents… This is the way leading to the cessation of effluents.’
dn12:63-77.3 | S: A teacher under whom a disciple achieves such a high distinction is one who does not deserve to be reprimanded. … | T: (none)
dn12:63-77.4 | P: …pe… | T: (none)
dn12:63-77.5 | S: They understand: ‘… there is nothing further for this place.’ | T: His heart, thus knowing, thus seeing, is released from the effluent of sensuality, the effluent of becoming, the effluent of ignorance. With release, there is the knowledge, ‘Released.’ He discerns that ‘Birth is ended, the holy life fulfilled, the task done. There is nothing further for this world.’
dn12:63-77.6 | S: A teacher under whom a disciple achieves such a high distinction is one who does not deserve to be reprimanded. When someone reprimands such a teacher, the reprimand is false, baseless, illegitimate, and blameworthy.” | T: “When a disciple of a teacher attains this sort of grand distinction, Lohicca, that is a teacher not worthy of criticism in the world, and if anyone were to criticize this sort of teacher, the criticism would be false, unfactual, unrighteous, & blameworthy.”
dn12:78.1 | S: When he had spoken, Lohicca said to the Buddha: | T: When this was said, the brahman Lohicca said to the Blessed One:
dn12:78.2 | S: “Suppose, Worthy Gotama, a person was falling over a cliff, and another person were to grab them by the hair, pull them up, and place them on solid ground. | T: “Master Gotama, it’s as if a man, having seized by the hair another man who was falling into the pit of hell, were to pull him up & set him on firm ground.
dn12:78.3 | S: In the same way, when I was falling off a cliff Worthy Gotama pulled me up and placed me on solid ground. | T: In the same way, Master Gotama has pulled me up as I was falling into the pit of hell and has set me on firm ground.
dn12:78.4 | S: Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! | T: Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent!
dn12:78.5 | S: As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, worthy Gotama has made the Teaching clear in many ways. | T: Just as if he were to place upright what was overturned, to reveal what was hidden, to show the way to one who was lost, or to carry a lamp into the dark so that those with eyes could see forms, in the same way has Master Gotama—through many lines of reasoning—made the Dhamma clear.
dn12:78.6 | S: I go for refuge to the worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. | T: I go to Master Gotama for refuge, to the Dhamma, & to the Saṅgha of monks.
dn12:78.7 | S: From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” | T: May Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge, from this day forward, for life.”
dn12:78.8 | P: Lohiccasuttaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ dvādasamaṁ. | T: (none)

## dn1
dn1:1.0 | S: 1. Talk on Wanderers | T: [ I ]
dn1:1.1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: I have heard that
dn1:1.1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was traveling along the road between Rājagaha and Nāḷandā together with a large Saṅgha of five hundred mendicants. | T: on one occasion the Blessed One was traveling on the highway between Rājagaha & Nālanda with a large Saṅgha of monks, approximately 500 monks.
dn1:1.1.3 | S: The wanderer Suppiya was also traveling along the same road, together with his resident pupil, the student Brahmadatta. | T: And Suppiya the wanderer was traveling on the highway between Rājagaha & Nālanda with his apprentice, Brahmadatta the young brahman.
dn1:1.1.4 | S: Meanwhile, Suppiya criticized the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha in many ways, | T: Along the way, Suppiya the wanderer spoke in many ways in dispraise of the Buddha, in dispraise of the Dhamma, in dispraise of the Saṅgha.
dn1:1.1.5 | S: but his pupil Brahmadatta praised them in many ways. | T: But Suppiya the wanderer’s apprentice, Brahmadatta the young brahman, spoke in many ways in praise of the Buddha, in praise of the Dhamma, in praise of the Saṅgha.
dn1:1.1.6 | S: And so both tutor and pupil followed behind the Buddha and the Saṅgha of mendicants directly contradicting each other. | T: Thus both of these, mentor & apprentice, speaking in direct contradiction to each other, followed right behind the Blessed One and the Saṅgha of monks.
dn1:1.2.1 | S: Then the Buddha took up residence for the night in the royal rest-house in Ambalaṭṭhikā together with the Saṅgha of mendicants. | T: Then the Blessed One, together with the Saṅgha of monks, entered the royal resthouse at Mango Stone to spend the night.
dn1:1.2.2 | S: And Suppiya and Brahmadatta did likewise. | T: And Suppiya the wanderer, together with his apprentice, Brahmadatta the young brahman, entered the royal resthouse at Mango Stone to spend the night.
dn1:1.2.3 | S: There too, Suppiya criticized the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha in many ways, | T: There, too, Suppiya the wanderer spoke in many ways in dispraise of the Buddha, in dispraise of the Dhamma, in dispraise of the Saṅgha.
dn1:1.2.4 | S: but his pupil Brahmadatta praised them in many ways. | T: But Suppiya the wanderer’s apprentice, Brahmadatta the young brahman, spoke in many ways in praise of the Buddha, in praise of the Dhamma, in praise of the Saṅgha.
dn1:1.2.5 | S: And so both tutor and pupil kept on directly contradicting each other. | T: Thus both of these, mentor & apprentice, speaking in direct contradiction to each other, followed right behind the Blessed One and the Saṅgha of monks.
dn1:1.3.1 | S: Then several mendicants rose at the crack of dawn and sat together in the pavilion, where the topic of judgmentalism came up: | T: Then, among a large number of monks who had arisen in the last watch of the night and were sitting gathered together in a pavilion, this discussion arose:
dn1:1.3.2 | S: “It’s incredible, reverends, it’s amazing how the diverse convictions of sentient beings have been well deciphered by the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. | T: “Isn’t it amazing! Isn’t it astounding!—how the Blessed One, the one who knows, the one who sees, worthy & rightly self-awakened, has truly experienced the differing convictions of beings.
dn1:1.3.3 | S: For this Suppiya criticizes the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha in many ways, | T: For this Suppiya the wanderer speaks in many ways in dispraise of the Buddha, in dispraise of the Dhamma, in dispraise of the Saṅgha.
dn1:1.3.4 | S: while his pupil Brahmadatta praises them in many ways. | T: But Suppiya the wanderer’s apprentice, Brahmadatta the young brahman, speaks in many ways in praise of the Buddha, in praise of the Dhamma, in praise of the Saṅgha.
dn1:1.3.5 | S: And so both tutor and pupil followed behind the Buddha and the Saṅgha of mendicants directly contradicting each other.” | T: Thus both of these, mentor & apprentice, speaking in direct contradiction to each other, follow right behind the Blessed One and the Saṅgha of monks.”
dn1:1.4.1 | S: When the Buddha found out about this discussion on judgmentalism among the mendicants, he went to the pavilion, where he sat on the seat spread out and addressed the mendicants: | T: Then the Blessed One, knowing this discussion of the monks, went to the pavilion and, on arrival, sat down on a seat laid out. Seated, he addressed the monks:
dn1:1.4.2 | S: “Mendicants, what were you sitting talking about just now? What conversation was left unfinished?” | T: “For what topic of conversation are you sitting gathered together here? What is the topic of your conversation that has been interrupted midway?”
dn1:1.4.3 | S: The mendicants told him what had happened, adding, | T: When this was said, the monks said to the Blessed One,
dn1:1.4.4 | P: “idha, bhante, amhākaṁ rattiyā paccūsasamayaṁ paccuṭṭhitānaṁ maṇḍalamāḷe sannisinnānaṁ sannipatitānaṁ ayaṁ saṅkhiyadhammo udapādi: | T: “Just now, lord, among us—as we had arisen in the last watch of the night and were sitting gathered together in (this) pavilion—this discussion arose:
dn1:1.4.5 | P: ‘acchariyaṁ, āvuso, abbhutaṁ, āvuso, yāvañcidaṁ tena bhagavatā jānatā passatā arahatā sammāsambuddhena sattānaṁ nānādhimuttikatā suppaṭividitā. | T: ‘Isn’t it amazing! Isn’t it astounding!—how the Blessed One, the one who knows, the one who sees, worthy & rightly self-awakened, has truly experienced the differing convictions of beings.
dn1:1.4.6 | P: Ayañhi suppiyo paribbājako anekapariyāyena buddhassa avaṇṇaṁ bhāsati, dhammassa avaṇṇaṁ bhāsati, saṅghassa avaṇṇaṁ bhāsati; | T: For this Suppiya the wanderer speaks in many ways in dispraise of the Buddha, in dispraise of the Dhamma, in dispraise of the Saṅgha.
dn1:1.4.7 | P: suppiyassa pana paribbājakassa antevāsī brahmadatto māṇavo anekapariyāyena buddhassa vaṇṇaṁ bhāsati, dhammassa vaṇṇaṁ bhāsati, saṅghassa vaṇṇaṁ bhāsati. | T: But Suppiya the wanderer’s apprentice, Brahmadatta the young brahman, speaks in many ways in praise of the Buddha, in praise of the Dhamma, in praise of the Saṅgha.
dn1:1.4.8 | P: Itihame ubho ācariyantevāsī aññamaññassa ujuvipaccanīkavādā bhagavantaṁ piṭṭhito piṭṭhito anubandhā honti bhikkhusaṅghañcā’ti. | T: Thus both of these, mentor & apprentice, speaking in direct contradiction to each other, follow right behind the Blessed One and the Saṅgha of monks.’
dn1:1.4.9 | S: “This was our conversation that was unfinished when the Buddha arrived.” | T: This was the topic of our conversation that was interrupted midway when the Blessed One arrived.”
dn1:1.5.1 | S: “Mendicants, if others criticize me, the teaching, or the Saṅgha, don’t make yourselves resentful, bitter, and exasperated. | T: “Monks, if others were to speak in dispraise of me, in dispraise of the Dhamma, or in dispraise of the Saṅgha, neither hatred nor antagonism nor displeasure of mind would be proper.
dn1:1.5.2 | S: You’ll get angry and upset, which would be an obstacle for you alone. | T: If others were to speak in dispraise of me, in dispraise of the Dhamma, or in dispraise of the Saṅgha, and at that you would be upset and angered, that would be an obstruction for you yourselves.
dn1:1.5.3 | S: If others were to criticize me, the teaching, or the Saṅgha, and you got angry and upset, would you be able to understand whether they spoke well or poorly?” | T: If others were to speak in dispraise of me, in dispraise of the Dhamma, or in dispraise of the Saṅgha, and at that you would be upset and angered, would you know what of those others was well-said or poorly said?”
dn1:1.5.4 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “No, lord.”
dn1:1.6.1 | S: “If others criticize me, the teaching, or the Saṅgha, you should explain that what is untrue is in fact untrue: | T: “If others were to speak in dispraise of me, in dispraise of the Dhamma, or in dispraise of the Saṅgha, you should unravel and explicate what is unfactual as unfactual:
dn1:1.6.2 | S: ‘This is why that’s untrue, this is why that’s false. There’s no such thing in us, it’s not found among us.’ | T: ‘This is unfactual, this is inaccurate, there is nothing of that in us, and that is not to be found in us.’
dn1:1.6.3 | S: If others praise me, the teaching, or the Saṅgha, don’t make yourselves thrilled, elated, and excited. | T: “If others were to speak in praise of me, in praise of the Dhamma, or in praise of the Saṅgha, neither joy nor gladness nor exhilaration of mind would be proper.
dn1:1.6.4 | S: You’ll get thrilled, elated, and excited, which would be an obstacle for you alone. | T: If others were to speak in praise of me, in praise of the Dhamma, or in praise of the Saṅgha, and at that you would be joyful, glad, & exhilarated, that would be an obstruction for you yourselves. If others were to speak in praise of me, in praise of the Dhamma, or in praise of the Saṅgha, and at that you would be joyful, glad, & exhilarated, would you know what of those others was well-said or poorly said?” “No, lord.”
dn1:1.6.5 | S: If others praise me, the teaching, or the Saṅgha, you should admit that what is true is in fact true: | T: “If others were to speak in praise of me, in praise of the Dhamma, or in praise of the Saṅgha, you should unravel and explicate what is factual as factual:
dn1:1.6.6 | S: ‘This is why that’s true, this is why that’s correct. There is such a thing in us, it is found among us.’ | T: ‘This is factual, this is accurate, there is that in us, and that is to be found in us.’
dn1:1.7.0.1 | S: 2. Ethics | T: (none)
dn1:1.7.0.2 | S: 2.1. The Shorter Section on Ethics | T: (none)
dn1:1.7.1 | S: When an ordinary person speaks praise of the Realized One, they speak only of trivial, trifling details of mere ethics. | T: “It would be of minor matters, lower matters, matters of virtue, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.7.2 | S: And what are the trivial, trifling details of mere ethics that an ordinary person speaks of? | T: And which are the minor matters, lower matters, matters of virtue, of which a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak?
dn1:1.8.1 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has given up killing living creatures. He has renounced the rod and the sword. He’s scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for all living beings.’ | T: The Lesser Section on Virtue “‘Abandoning the taking of life, the contemplative Gotama abstains from the taking of life. He dwells with his rod laid down, his knife laid down, scrupulous, merciful, compassionate for the welfare of all living beings.’
dn1:1.8.2 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.8.3 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has given up stealing. He takes only what’s given, and expects only what’s given. He keeps himself clean by not thieving.’ | T: “Or: ‘Abandoning the taking of what is not given, the contemplative Gotama abstains from taking what is not given. He takes only what is given, accepts only what is given, lives not by stealth but by means of a self that has become pure.’
dn1:1.8.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.8.5 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has given up unchastity. He is chaste, set apart, refraining from the vulgar act of sex.’ | T: “Or: ‘Abandoning uncelibacy, the contemplative Gotama lives a celibate life, aloof, refraining from the sexual act that is the villager’s way.’
dn1:1.8.6 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.9.1 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has given up lying. He speaks the truth and sticks to the truth. He’s honest and dependable, and doesn’t trick the world with his words.’ | T: “Or: ‘Abandoning false speech, the contemplative Gotama abstains from false speech. He speaks the truth, holds to the truth, is firm, reliable, no deceiver of the world.’
dn1:1.9.2 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.9.3 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has given up backbiting. He doesn’t repeat in one place what he heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead, he reconciles those who are divided and support those who are united, delighting in harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony.’ | T: “Or: ‘Abandoning divisive speech, the contemplative Gotama abstains from divisive speech. What he has heard here he does not tell there to break those people apart from these people here. What he has heard there he does not tell here to break these people apart from those people there. Thus reconciling those who have broken apart or cementing those who are united, he loves concord, delights in concord, enjoys concord, speaks things that create concord.’
dn1:1.9.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.9.5 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has given up harsh speech. He speaks in a way that’s mellow, pleasing to the ear, endearing, going to the heart, polite, and likable and agreeable to the people.’ | T: “Or: ‘Abandoning abusive speech, the contemplative Gotama abstains from abusive speech. He speaks words that are soothing to the ear, that are affectionate, that go to the heart, that are polite, appealing, & pleasing to people at large.’
dn1:1.9.6 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.9.7 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has given up talking nonsense. His words are timely, true, and meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. He says things at the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial.’ | T: “Or: ‘Abandoning idle chatter, he abstains from idle chatter. He speaks in season, speaks what is factual, what is in accordance with the goal [attha], the Dhamma, & the Vinaya. He speaks words worth treasuring, seasonable, reasonable, circumscribed, connected with what is profitable [attha].’
dn1:1.9.8 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.10.1 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama refrains from injuring plants and seeds.’ | T: “Or: ‘The contemplative Gotama abstains from damaging seed & plant life.’…
dn1:1.10.2 | P: iti vā hi, bhikkhave …pe…. | T: (none)
dn1:1.10.3 | S: ‘He eats in one part of the day, abstaining from eating at night and food at the wrong time.’ | T: “Or: ‘The contemplative Gotama eats only once a day, refraining from the evening meal and from food at the wrong time of day.’…
dn1:1.10.4 | S: ‘He refrains from seeing shows of dancing, singing, and music.’ | T: “Or: ‘The contemplative Gotama abstains from dancing, singing, instrumental music, and from watching shows.’…
dn1:1.10.5 | S: ‘He refrains from attiring and adorning himself with garlands, fragrance, and makeup.’ | T: “Or: ‘The contemplative Gotama abstains from wearing garlands and from beautifying himself with scents & cosmetics.’…
dn1:1.10.6 | S: ‘He refrains from high and luxurious beds.’ | T: “Or: ‘The contemplative Gotama abstains from high and luxurious beds & seats.’…
dn1:1.10.7 | S: ‘He refrains from receiving gold and currency, | T: “Or: ‘The contemplative Gotama abstains from accepting gold & money.’…
dn1:1.10.8 | S: raw grains, | T: “Or: ‘The contemplative Gotama abstains from accepting uncooked grain…
dn1:1.10.9 | S: raw meat, | T: raw meat…
dn1:1.10.10 | S: women and girls, | T: women & girls…
dn1:1.10.11 | S: male and female bondservants, | T: male & female slaves…
dn1:1.10.12 | S: goats and sheep, | T: goats & sheep…
dn1:1.10.13 | S: chickens and pigs, | T: fowl & pigs…
dn1:1.10.14 | S: elephants, cows, horses, and mares, | T: elephants, cattle, steeds, & mares…
dn1:1.10.15 | S: and fields and land.’ | T: fields & property.’…
dn1:1.10.16 | S: ‘He refrains from running errands and messages; | T: “Or: ‘The contemplative Gotama abstains from running messages…
dn1:1.10.17 | S: buying and selling; | T: from buying & selling…
dn1:1.10.18 | S: falsifying weights, metals, or measures; | T: from dealing with false scales, false metals, & false measures…
dn1:1.10.19 | S: bribery, fraud, cheating, and duplicity; | T: from bribery, deception, & fraud.’…
dn1:1.10.20 | S: mutilation, murder, abduction, banditry, plunder, and violence.’ | T: “Or: ‘The contemplative Gotama abstains from mutilating, executing, imprisoning, highway robbery, plunder, & violence.’
dn1:1.10.21 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.10.22 | S: The shorter section on ethics is complete. | T: (none)
dn1:1.11.0 | S: 2.2. The Middle Section on Ethics | T: The Intermediate Section on Virtue
dn1:1.11.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in injuring plants and seeds. | T: “Or: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, remain addicted to damaging seed & plant life such as these—
dn1:1.11.2 | S: These include plants propagated from roots, trunks, cuttings, or joints; and those from regular seeds as the fifth. | T: plants propagated from roots, stems, joints, buddings, & seeds—
dn1:1.11.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such injury to plants and seeds.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from damaging seed and plant life such as these.’
dn1:1.11.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.12.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in storing up goods for their own use. | T: “Or: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, remain addicted to consuming stored-up goods such as these—
dn1:1.12.2 | S: This includes such things as food, drink, clothes, vehicles, bedding, fragrance, and things of the flesh. | T: stored-up food, stored-up drinks, stored-up clothing, stored-up vehicles, stored-up bedding, stored-up scents, & stored-up meat—
dn1:1.12.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from storing up such goods.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from consuming stored-up goods such as these.’
dn1:1.12.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.13.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in seeing shows. | T: “Or: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, remain addicted to watching shows such as these—
dn1:1.13.2 | S: This includes such things as dancing, singing, music, performances, and storytelling; clapping, gongs, and kettledrums; beauty pageants; pole-acrobatics and bone-washing displays of the corpse-workers; battles of elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, goats, rams, chickens, and quails; staff-fights, boxing, and wrestling; combat, roll calls of the armed forces, battle-formations, and regimental reviews. | T: dancing, singing, instrumental music, plays, ballad recitations, hand-clapping, cymbals & drums, magic-lantern scenes, acrobatic and conjuring tricks, elephant fights, horse fights, buffalo fights, bull fights, goat fights, ram fights, cock fights, quail fights; fighting with staves, boxing, wrestling, war-games, roll calls, battle arrays, & regimental reviews—
dn1:1.13.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such shows.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from watching shows such as these.’
dn1:1.13.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.14.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in gambling that causes negligence. | T: “Or: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, remain addicted to heedless & idle games such as these—
dn1:1.14.2 | S: This includes such things as checkers with eight or ten rows, checkers in the air, hopscotch, spillikins, board-games, tip-cat, drawing straws, dice, leaf-flutes, toy plows, somersaults, pinwheels, toy measures, toy carts, toy bows, guessing words from syllables, guessing another’s thoughts, and imitating musical instruments. | T: eight-row chess, ten-row chess, chess in the air, hopscotch, spillikins, dice, stick games, hand-pictures, ball-games, blowing through toy pipes, playing with toy plows, turning somersaults, playing with toy windmills, toy measures, toy chariots, toy bows, guessing letters drawn in the air, guessing thoughts, mimicking deformities—
dn1:1.14.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such gambling.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from heedless & idle games such as these.’
dn1:1.14.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.15.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still make use of high and luxurious bedding. | T: “Or: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, remain addicted to high & luxurious furnishings such as these—
dn1:1.15.2 | S: This includes such things as sofas, couches, woolen covers—shag-piled, colorful, white, embroidered with flowers, quilted, embroidered with animals, double or single fringed—and silk covers studded with gems, as well as silken sheets, woollen carpets, rugs for elephants, horses, or chariots, black antelope hides and woven rugs, and spreads of fine deer hide, with a canopy above and red cushions at both ends. | T: over-sized couches, couches adorned with carved animals, long-haired coverlets, multi-colored patchwork coverlets, white woolen coverlets, woolen coverlets embroidered with flowers or animal figures, stuffed quilts, coverlets with fringe, silk coverlets embroidered with gems; large woolen carpets; elephant, horse, and chariot rugs, antelope-hide rugs, deer-hide rugs; couches with canopies, couches with red cushions for the head & feet—
dn1:1.15.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such bedding.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from using high and luxurious furnishings such as these.’
dn1:1.15.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.16.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in attiring and adorning themselves with garlands, fragrance, and makeup. | T: “Or: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, remain addicted to scents, cosmetics, and means of beautification such as these—
dn1:1.16.2 | S: This includes such things as applying beauty products by anointing, massaging, bathing, and rubbing; mirrors, ointments, garlands, fragrances, and makeup; face-powder, foundation, bracelets, headbands, fancy walking-sticks or containers, rapiers, parasols, fancy sandals, turbans, jewelry, chowries, and long-fringed white robes. | T: rubbing powders into the body, massaging with oils, bathing in perfumed water, kneading the limbs, using mirrors, ointments, garlands, scents, creams, face-powders, mascara, bracelets, head-bands, decorated walking sticks, ornamented water-bottles, swords, fancy sunshades, decorated sandals, turbans, gems, yak-tail whisks, long-fringed white robes—
dn1:1.16.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such beautification and adornment.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from using scents, cosmetics, and means of beautification such as these.’
dn1:1.16.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.17.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in low talk. This includes such topics as | T: “Or: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, remain addicted to talking about “animal” topics such as these—
dn1:1.17.2 | S: talk about kings, bandits, and chief ministers; talk about armies, threats, and wars; talk about food, drink, clothes, and beds; talk about garlands and fragrances; talk about family, vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and countries; talk about women and heroes; talk at the street market and the place for water pots; talk about the departed; motley talk; tales of land and sea; and talk about being reborn in this or that place. | T: talking about kings, robbers, ministers of state; armies, alarms, and battles; food and drink; clothing, furniture, garlands, and scents; relatives; vehicles; villages, towns, cities, the countryside; women and heroes; the gossip of the street and the well; tales of the dead; tales of diversity [philosophical discussions of the past and future], the creation of the world & of the sea, and talk of whether things exist or not—
dn1:1.17.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low talk.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from talking about “animal” topics such as these.’
dn1:1.17.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.18.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in arguments. | T: “Or: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, remain addicted to debates such as these—
dn1:1.18.2 | S: They say such things as: “You don’t understand this teaching and training. I understand this teaching and training. What, you understand this teaching and training? You’re practicing wrong. I’m practicing right. I stay on topic, you don’t. You said last what you should have said first. You said first what you should have said last. What you’ve thought so much about has been disproved. Your doctrine is refuted. Go on, save your doctrine! You’re trapped; get yourself out of this—if you can!” | T: “You understand this doctrine & discipline? I’m the one who understands this doctrine & discipline. How could you understand this doctrine & discipline? You’re practicing wrongly. I’m practicing rightly. I’m being consistent. You’re not. What should be said first you said last. What should be said last you said first. What you took so long to think out has been refuted. Your doctrine has been overthrown. You’re defeated. Go and try to salvage your doctrine or extricate yourself if you can!”—
dn1:1.18.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such argumentative talk.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from debates such as these.’
dn1:1.18.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.19.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in running errands and messages. | T: “Or: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, remain addicted to running messages & errands for people such as these—
dn1:1.19.2 | S: This includes running errands for rulers, ministers, aristocrats, brahmins, householders, or princes who say: “Go here, go there. Take this, bring that from there.” | T: kings, ministers of state, noble warriors, brahmans, householders, or youths (who say), “Go here. Go there. Take this there. Fetch that here”—
dn1:1.19.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such errands.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from running messages & errands for people such as these.’
dn1:1.19.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.20.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in deceit, flattery, hinting, and belittling, and using material things to chase after other material things. | T: “Or: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, engage in scheming, persuading, hinting, belittling, & pursuing gain with gain,
dn1:1.20.2 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such fawning and flattery.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from forms of scheming & persuading [improper ways of trying to gain material support from donors] such as these.’
dn1:1.20.3 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.20.4 | S: The middle section on ethics is complete. | T: (none)
dn1:1.21.0 | S: 2.3. The Large Section on Ethics | T: The Great Section on Virtue
dn1:1.21.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: “Or: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, maintain themselves by wrong livelihood, by such “animal” arts as:
dn1:1.21.2 | S: This includes such fields as augury, omenology, divining portents, interpreting dreams, divining features of men and women, divining holes in cloth gnawed by mice, fire offerings, ladle offerings, offerings of husks, rice powder, rice, ghee, or oil; offerings from the mouth, blood sacrifices, limb-reading; geomancy for building sites, fields, and cemeteries; exorcisms, earth magic, snake charming, poisons; the lore of the scorpion, the rat, the bird, and the crow; prophesying lifespan, chanting for protection, and divining omens from wild animals. | T: reading marks on the limbs [e.g., palmistry]; reading omens & signs; interpreting celestial events [falling stars, comets]; interpreting dreams; reading features of the body [e.g., phrenology]; reading marks on cloth gnawed by mice; offering fire oblations, oblations from a ladle, oblations of husks, rice powder, rice grains, ghee, & oil; offering oblations from the mouth; offering blood-sacrifices; making predictions based on the fingertips; geomancy; making predictions for state officials; laying demons in a cemetery; placing spells on spirits; earth-skills [divining water and gems?]; snake-skills, poison-skills, scorpion-skills, rat-skills, bird-skills, crow-skills; predicting life spans; giving protective charms; casting horoscopes—
dn1:1.21.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from wrong livelihood, from “animal” arts such as these.’
dn1:1.21.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: (none)
dn1:1.22.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: “Or: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, maintain themselves by wrong livelihood, by such “animal” arts as:
dn1:1.22.2 | S: This includes reading the marks of gems, cloth, clubs, swords, spears, arrows, bows, weapons, women, men, boys, girls, male and female bondservants, elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, cows, goats, rams, chickens, quails, monitor lizards, rabbits, tortoises, or deer. | T: determining lucky & unlucky gems, staffs, garments, swords, arrows, bows, & other weapons; women, men, boys, girls, male slaves, female slaves; elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, cows, goats, rams, fowl, quails, lizards, rabbits, tortoises, & other animals—
dn1:1.22.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from wrong livelihood, from “animal” arts such as these.’
dn1:1.22.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: (none)
dn1:1.23.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: “Or: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, maintain themselves by wrong livelihood, by such “animal” arts as (forecasting):
dn1:1.23.2 | S: This includes making predictions that the king will march forth or march back; or that our king will attack and the enemy king will retreat, or vice versa; or that our king will triumph and the enemy king will be defeated, or vice versa; and so there will be victory for one and defeat for the other. | T: the rulers will march forth; the rulers will not march forth; our rulers will attack, and their rulers will retreat; their rulers will attack, and our rulers will retreat; there will be triumph for our rulers and defeat for their rulers; there will be triumph for their rulers and defeat for our rulers; thus there will be triumph for this one, defeat for that one—
dn1:1.23.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from wrong livelihood, from “animal” arts such as these.’
dn1:1.23.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: (none)
dn1:1.24.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: “Or: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, maintain themselves by wrong livelihood, by such “animal” arts as (forecasting):
dn1:1.24.2 | S: This includes making predictions that there will be an eclipse of the moon, or sun, or stars; that the sun, moon, and stars will be in conjunction or in opposition; that there will be a meteor shower, a fiery horizon, an earthquake, or thunder in the heavens; that there will be a rising, a setting, a darkening, a brightening of the moon, sun, and stars. And it also includes making predictions about the results of all such phenomena. | T: there will be a lunar eclipse; there will be a solar eclipse; there will be an occultation of [a conjunction of the moon or a planet with] an asterism; the sun & moon will be favorable; the sun & moon will be unfavorable; the asterisms will be favorable; the asterisms will be unfavorable; there will be a meteor shower; there will be a flickering light on the horizon [an aurora?]; there will be an earthquake; there will be thunder coming from dry clouds; there will be a rising, a setting, a darkening, a brightening of the sun, moon, & asterisms; such will be the result of the lunar eclipse… the rising, setting, darkening, brightening of the sun, moon, & asterisms—
