## mn148, continued
mn148:28.7 | S: the underlying tendency to ignorance underlies that. | T: then one’s ignorance-obsession gets obsessed.
mn148:28.8 | S: Mendicants, without giving up the underlying tendency to greed for pleasant feeling, without dispelling the underlying tendency to aversion toward painful feeling, without eradicating ignorance in the case of neutral feeling, without giving up ignorance and without giving rise to knowledge, it is quite impossible to make an end of suffering in this very life. | T: That a person—without abandoning passion-obsession with regard to a feeling of pleasure, without abolishing resistance-obsession with regard to a feeling of pain, without uprooting ignorance-obsession with regard to a feeling of neither pleasure nor pain, without abandoning ignorance and giving rise to clear knowing—would put an end to suffering & stress in the here & now: Such a thing isn’t possible.
mn148:29-33.1 | S: Ear consciousness … | T: “Dependent on the ear & sounds.…
mn148:29-33.2 | S: Nose consciousness … | T: “Dependent on the nose & aromas.…
mn148:29-33.3 | S: Tongue consciousness … | T: “Dependent on the tongue & flavors.…
mn148:29-33.4 | S: Body consciousness … | T: “Dependent on the body & tactile sensations.…
mn148:29-33.5 | S: Mind consciousness arises dependent on the mind and ideas. The meeting of the three is contact. Contact is a requirement for the arising of what is felt as pleasant, painful, or neutral. | T: “Dependent on the intellect & ideas there arises consciousness at the intellect. The meeting of the three is contact. With contact as a requisite condition, there arises what is felt either as pleasure, pain, or neither pleasure nor pain.
mn148:29-33.6 | S: When you experience a pleasant feeling, if you approve, welcome, and keep clinging to it, | T: If, when touched by a feeling of pleasure, one relishes it, welcomes it, or remains fastened to it,
mn148:29-33.7 | S: the underlying tendency to greed underlies that. | T: then one’s passion-obsession gets obsessed.
mn148:29-33.8 | S: When you experience a painful feeling, if you sorrow and wail and lament, beating your breast and falling into confusion, | T: If, when touched by a feeling of pain, one sorrows, grieves, & laments, beats one’s breast, becomes distraught,
mn148:29-33.9 | S: the underlying tendency to aversion underlies that. | T: then one’s resistance-obsession gets obsessed.
mn148:29-33.10 | S: When you experience a neutral feeling, if you don’t truly understand that feeling’s origin, disappearance, gratification, drawback, and escape, | T: If, when touched by a feeling of neither pleasure nor pain, one does not discern, as it has come to be, the origination, passing away, allure, drawback, or escape from that feeling,
mn148:29-33.11 | S: the underlying tendency to ignorance underlies that. | T: then one’s ignorance-obsession gets obsessed.
mn148:29-33.12 | S: Mendicants, without giving up the underlying tendency to greed for pleasant feeling, without dispelling the underlying tendency to aversion toward painful feeling, without eradicating ignorance in the case of neutral feeling, without giving up ignorance and without giving rise to knowledge, it is quite impossible to make an end of suffering in this very life. | T: That a person—without abandoning passion-obsession with regard to a feeling of pleasure, without abolishing resistance-obsession with regard to a feeling of pain, without uprooting ignorance-obsession with regard to a feeling of neither pleasure nor pain, without abandoning ignorance and giving rise to clear knowing—would put an end to suffering & stress in the here & now: Such a thing isn’t possible.
mn148:34.1 | S: Eye consciousness arises dependent on the eye and sights. The meeting of the three is contact. Contact is a requirement for the arising of what is felt as pleasant, painful, or neutral. | T: “Dependent on the eye & forms there arises consciousness at the eye. The meeting of the three is contact. With contact as a requisite condition, there arises what is felt either as pleasure, pain, or neither pleasure nor pain.
mn148:34.2 | S: When you experience a pleasant feeling, if you don’t approve, welcome, and keep clinging to it, | T: If, when touched by a feeling of pleasure, one does not relish it, welcome it, or remain fastened to it,
mn148:34.3 | S: the underlying tendency to greed does not underlie that. | T: then one’s passion-obsession doesn’t get obsessed.
mn148:34.4 | S: When you experience a painful feeling, if you don’t sorrow or wail or lament, beating your breast and falling into confusion, | T: If, when touched by a feeling of pain, one does not sorrow, grieve, or lament, beat one’s breast or become distraught,
mn148:34.5 | S: the underlying tendency to aversion does not underlie that. | T: then one’s resistance-obsession doesn’t get obsessed.
mn148:34.6 | S: When you experience a neutral feeling, if you truly understand that feeling’s origin, disappearance, gratification, drawback, and escape, | T: If, when touched by a feeling of neither pleasure nor pain, one discerns, as it has come to be, the origination, passing away, allure, drawback, & escape from that feeling,
mn148:34.7 | S: the underlying tendency to ignorance does not underlie that. | T: then one’s ignorance-obsession doesn’t get obsessed.
mn148:34.8 | S: Mendicants, after giving up the underlying tendency to greed for pleasant feeling, after dispelling the underlying tendency to aversion toward painful feeling, after eradicating ignorance in the case of neutral feeling, after giving up ignorance and giving rise to knowledge, it’s quite possible to make an end of suffering in this very life. | T: That a person—through abandoning passion-obsession with regard to a feeling of pleasure, through abolishing resistance-obsession with regard to a feeling of pain, through uprooting ignorance-obsession with regard to a feeling of neither pleasure nor pain, through abandoning ignorance and giving rise to clear knowing—would put an end to suffering & stress in the here & now: Such a thing is possible.
mn148:35.1 | S: Ear consciousness … | T: “Dependent on the ear & sounds.…
mn148:36.1 | S: Nose consciousness … | T: “Dependent on the nose & aromas.…
mn148:37.1 | S: Tongue consciousness … | T: “Dependent on the tongue & flavors.…
mn148:38.1 | S: Body consciousness … | T: “Dependent on the body & tactile sensations.…
mn148:39.1 | S: Mind consciousness arises dependent on the mind and ideas. The meeting of the three is contact. Contact is a requirement for what is felt as pleasant, painful, or neutral. | T: “Dependent on the intellect & ideas there arises consciousness at the intellect. The meeting of the three is contact. With contact as a requisite condition, there arises what is felt either as pleasure, pain, or neither pleasure nor pain.
mn148:39.2 | S: When you experience a pleasant feeling, if you don’t approve, welcome, and keep clinging to it, | T: If, when touched by a feeling of pleasure, one does not relish it, welcome it, or remain fastened to it,
mn148:39.3 | S: the underlying tendency to greed does not underlie that. | T: then one’s passion-obsession does not get obsessed.
mn148:39.4 | S: When you experience a painful feeling, if you don’t sorrow or wail or lament, beating your breast and falling into confusion, | T: If, when touched by a feeling of pain, one does not sorrow, grieve, or lament, beat one’s breast or become distraught,
mn148:39.5 | S: the underlying tendency to aversion does not underlie that. | T: then one’s resistance-obsession does not get obsessed.
mn148:39.6 | S: When you experience a neutral feeling, if you truly understand that feeling’s origin, disappearance, gratification, drawback, and escape, | T: If, when touched by a feeling of neither pleasure nor pain, one discerns, as it has come to be, the origination, passing away, allure, drawback, & escape from that feeling,
mn148:39.7 | S: the underlying tendency to ignorance does not underlie that. | T: then one’s ignorance-obsession does not get obsessed.
mn148:39.8 | S: Mendicants, after giving up the underlying tendency to greed for pleasant feeling, after dispelling the underlying tendency to aversion toward painful feeling, after eradicating ignorance in the case of neutral feeling, after giving up ignorance and giving rise to knowledge, it’s quite possible to make an end of suffering in this very life. | T: That a person—through abandoning passion-obsession with regard to a feeling of pleasure, through abolishing resistance-obsession with regard to a feeling of pain, through uprooting ignorance-obsession with regard to a feeling of neither pleasure nor pain, through abandoning ignorance and giving rise to clear knowing—would put an end to suffering & stress in the here & now: Such a thing is possible.
mn148:40.1 | S: Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye, sights, eye consciousness, eye contact, feeling, and craving. | T: “Seeing thus, the instructed disciple of the noble ones grows disenchanted with the eye, disenchanted with forms, disenchanted with consciousness at the eye, disenchanted with contact at the eye, disenchanted with feeling, disenchanted with craving.
mn148:41.1 | S: They grow disillusioned with the ear … | T: “He grows disenchanted with the ear…
mn148:41.2 | S: nose … | T: “He grows disenchanted with the nose…
mn148:41.3 | S: tongue … | T: “He grows disenchanted with the tongue…
mn148:41.4 | S: body … | T: “He grows disenchanted with the body…
mn148:41.5 | S: mind, ideas, mind consciousness, mind contact, feeling, and craving. | T: “He grows disenchanted with the intellect, disenchanted with ideas, disenchanted with consciousness at the intellect, disenchanted with contact at the intellect, disenchanted with feeling, disenchanted with craving.
mn148:41.6 | S: Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When it is freed, they know it is freed. | T: Disenchanted, he becomes dispassionate. Through dispassion, he is released. With release, there is the knowledge, ‘Released.’
mn148:41.7 | S: They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’” | T: He discerns that ‘Birth is ended, the holy life fulfilled, the task done. There is nothing further for this world.’”
mn148:41.8 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: That is what the Blessed One said.
mn148:41.9 | S: Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said. | T: Gratified, the monks delighted at his words.
mn148:41.10 | S: And while this discourse was being spoken, the minds of sixty mendicants were freed from defilements by not grasping. | T: And while this explanation was being given, the hearts of sixty-some monks, through lack of clinging/sustenance, were released from effluents.
mn148:41.11 | P: Chachakkasuttaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ chaṭṭhaṁ. | T: (none)

## dn1
dn1:1.0 | S: 1. Talk on Wanderers | T: [ I ]
dn1:1.1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: I have heard that
dn1:1.1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was traveling along the road between Rājagaha and Nāḷandā together with a large Saṅgha of five hundred mendicants. | T: on one occasion the Blessed One was traveling on the highway between Rājagaha & Nālanda with a large Saṅgha of monks, approximately 500 monks.
dn1:1.1.3 | S: The wanderer Suppiya was also traveling along the same road, together with his resident pupil, the student Brahmadatta. | T: And Suppiya the wanderer was traveling on the highway between Rājagaha & Nālanda with his apprentice, Brahmadatta the young brahman.
dn1:1.1.4 | S: Meanwhile, Suppiya criticized the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha in many ways, | T: Along the way, Suppiya the wanderer spoke in many ways in dispraise of the Buddha, in dispraise of the Dhamma, in dispraise of the Saṅgha.
dn1:1.1.5 | S: but his pupil Brahmadatta praised them in many ways. | T: But Suppiya the wanderer’s apprentice, Brahmadatta the young brahman, spoke in many ways in praise of the Buddha, in praise of the Dhamma, in praise of the Saṅgha.
dn1:1.1.6 | S: And so both tutor and pupil followed behind the Buddha and the Saṅgha of mendicants directly contradicting each other. | T: Thus both of these, mentor & apprentice, speaking in direct contradiction to each other, followed right behind the Blessed One and the Saṅgha of monks.
dn1:1.2.1 | S: Then the Buddha took up residence for the night in the royal rest-house in Ambalaṭṭhikā together with the Saṅgha of mendicants. | T: Then the Blessed One, together with the Saṅgha of monks, entered the royal resthouse at Mango Stone to spend the night.
dn1:1.2.2 | S: And Suppiya and Brahmadatta did likewise. | T: And Suppiya the wanderer, together with his apprentice, Brahmadatta the young brahman, entered the royal resthouse at Mango Stone to spend the night.
dn1:1.2.3 | S: There too, Suppiya criticized the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha in many ways, | T: There, too, Suppiya the wanderer spoke in many ways in dispraise of the Buddha, in dispraise of the Dhamma, in dispraise of the Saṅgha.
dn1:1.2.4 | S: but his pupil Brahmadatta praised them in many ways. | T: But Suppiya the wanderer’s apprentice, Brahmadatta the young brahman, spoke in many ways in praise of the Buddha, in praise of the Dhamma, in praise of the Saṅgha.
dn1:1.2.5 | S: And so both tutor and pupil kept on directly contradicting each other. | T: Thus both of these, mentor & apprentice, speaking in direct contradiction to each other, followed right behind the Blessed One and the Saṅgha of monks.
dn1:1.3.1 | S: Then several mendicants rose at the crack of dawn and sat together in the pavilion, where the topic of judgmentalism came up: | T: Then, among a large number of monks who had arisen in the last watch of the night and were sitting gathered together in a pavilion, this discussion arose:
dn1:1.3.2 | S: “It’s incredible, reverends, it’s amazing how the diverse convictions of sentient beings have been well deciphered by the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. | T: “Isn’t it amazing! Isn’t it astounding!—how the Blessed One, the one who knows, the one who sees, worthy & rightly self-awakened, has truly experienced the differing convictions of beings.
dn1:1.3.3 | S: For this Suppiya criticizes the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha in many ways, | T: For this Suppiya the wanderer speaks in many ways in dispraise of the Buddha, in dispraise of the Dhamma, in dispraise of the Saṅgha.
dn1:1.3.4 | S: while his pupil Brahmadatta praises them in many ways. | T: But Suppiya the wanderer’s apprentice, Brahmadatta the young brahman, speaks in many ways in praise of the Buddha, in praise of the Dhamma, in praise of the Saṅgha.
dn1:1.3.5 | S: And so both tutor and pupil followed behind the Buddha and the Saṅgha of mendicants directly contradicting each other.” | T: Thus both of these, mentor & apprentice, speaking in direct contradiction to each other, follow right behind the Blessed One and the Saṅgha of monks.”
dn1:1.4.1 | S: When the Buddha found out about this discussion on judgmentalism among the mendicants, he went to the pavilion, where he sat on the seat spread out and addressed the mendicants: | T: Then the Blessed One, knowing this discussion of the monks, went to the pavilion and, on arrival, sat down on a seat laid out. Seated, he addressed the monks:
dn1:1.4.2 | S: “Mendicants, what were you sitting talking about just now? What conversation was left unfinished?” | T: “For what topic of conversation are you sitting gathered together here? What is the topic of your conversation that has been interrupted midway?”
dn1:1.4.3 | S: The mendicants told him what had happened, adding, | T: When this was said, the monks said to the Blessed One,
dn1:1.4.4 | P: “idha, bhante, amhākaṁ rattiyā paccūsasamayaṁ paccuṭṭhitānaṁ maṇḍalamāḷe sannisinnānaṁ sannipatitānaṁ ayaṁ saṅkhiyadhammo udapādi: | T: “Just now, lord, among us—as we had arisen in the last watch of the night and were sitting gathered together in (this) pavilion—this discussion arose:
dn1:1.4.5 | P: ‘acchariyaṁ, āvuso, abbhutaṁ, āvuso, yāvañcidaṁ tena bhagavatā jānatā passatā arahatā sammāsambuddhena sattānaṁ nānādhimuttikatā suppaṭividitā. | T: ‘Isn’t it amazing! Isn’t it astounding!—how the Blessed One, the one who knows, the one who sees, worthy & rightly self-awakened, has truly experienced the differing convictions of beings.
dn1:1.4.6 | P: Ayañhi suppiyo paribbājako anekapariyāyena buddhassa avaṇṇaṁ bhāsati, dhammassa avaṇṇaṁ bhāsati, saṅghassa avaṇṇaṁ bhāsati; | T: For this Suppiya the wanderer speaks in many ways in dispraise of the Buddha, in dispraise of the Dhamma, in dispraise of the Saṅgha.
dn1:1.4.7 | P: suppiyassa pana paribbājakassa antevāsī brahmadatto māṇavo anekapariyāyena buddhassa vaṇṇaṁ bhāsati, dhammassa vaṇṇaṁ bhāsati, saṅghassa vaṇṇaṁ bhāsati. | T: But Suppiya the wanderer’s apprentice, Brahmadatta the young brahman, speaks in many ways in praise of the Buddha, in praise of the Dhamma, in praise of the Saṅgha.
dn1:1.4.8 | P: Itihame ubho ācariyantevāsī aññamaññassa ujuvipaccanīkavādā bhagavantaṁ piṭṭhito piṭṭhito anubandhā honti bhikkhusaṅghañcā’ti. | T: Thus both of these, mentor & apprentice, speaking in direct contradiction to each other, follow right behind the Blessed One and the Saṅgha of monks.’
dn1:1.4.9 | S: “This was our conversation that was unfinished when the Buddha arrived.” | T: This was the topic of our conversation that was interrupted midway when the Blessed One arrived.”
dn1:1.5.1 | S: “Mendicants, if others criticize me, the teaching, or the Saṅgha, don’t make yourselves resentful, bitter, and exasperated. | T: “Monks, if others were to speak in dispraise of me, in dispraise of the Dhamma, or in dispraise of the Saṅgha, neither hatred nor antagonism nor displeasure of mind would be proper.
dn1:1.5.2 | S: You’ll get angry and upset, which would be an obstacle for you alone. | T: If others were to speak in dispraise of me, in dispraise of the Dhamma, or in dispraise of the Saṅgha, and at that you would be upset and angered, that would be an obstruction for you yourselves.
dn1:1.5.3 | S: If others were to criticize me, the teaching, or the Saṅgha, and you got angry and upset, would you be able to understand whether they spoke well or poorly?” | T: If others were to speak in dispraise of me, in dispraise of the Dhamma, or in dispraise of the Saṅgha, and at that you would be upset and angered, would you know what of those others was well-said or poorly said?”
dn1:1.5.4 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “No, lord.”
dn1:1.6.1 | S: “If others criticize me, the teaching, or the Saṅgha, you should explain that what is untrue is in fact untrue: | T: “If others were to speak in dispraise of me, in dispraise of the Dhamma, or in dispraise of the Saṅgha, you should unravel and explicate what is unfactual as unfactual:
dn1:1.6.2 | S: ‘This is why that’s untrue, this is why that’s false. There’s no such thing in us, it’s not found among us.’ | T: ‘This is unfactual, this is inaccurate, there is nothing of that in us, and that is not to be found in us.’
dn1:1.6.3 | S: If others praise me, the teaching, or the Saṅgha, don’t make yourselves thrilled, elated, and excited. | T: “If others were to speak in praise of me, in praise of the Dhamma, or in praise of the Saṅgha, neither joy nor gladness nor exhilaration of mind would be proper.
dn1:1.6.4 | S: You’ll get thrilled, elated, and excited, which would be an obstacle for you alone. | T: If others were to speak in praise of me, in praise of the Dhamma, or in praise of the Saṅgha, and at that you would be joyful, glad, & exhilarated, that would be an obstruction for you yourselves. If others were to speak in praise of me, in praise of the Dhamma, or in praise of the Saṅgha, and at that you would be joyful, glad, & exhilarated, would you know what of those others was well-said or poorly said?” “No, lord.”
dn1:1.6.5 | S: If others praise me, the teaching, or the Saṅgha, you should admit that what is true is in fact true: | T: “If others were to speak in praise of me, in praise of the Dhamma, or in praise of the Saṅgha, you should unravel and explicate what is factual as factual:
dn1:1.6.6 | S: ‘This is why that’s true, this is why that’s correct. There is such a thing in us, it is found among us.’ | T: ‘This is factual, this is accurate, there is that in us, and that is to be found in us.’
dn1:1.7.0.1 | S: 2. Ethics | T: (none)
dn1:1.7.0.2 | S: 2.1. The Shorter Section on Ethics | T: (none)
dn1:1.7.1 | S: When an ordinary person speaks praise of the Realized One, they speak only of trivial, trifling details of mere ethics. | T: “It would be of minor matters, lower matters, matters of virtue, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.7.2 | S: And what are the trivial, trifling details of mere ethics that an ordinary person speaks of? | T: And which are the minor matters, lower matters, matters of virtue, of which a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak?
dn1:1.8.1 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has given up killing living creatures. He has renounced the rod and the sword. He’s scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for all living beings.’ | T: The Lesser Section on Virtue “‘Abandoning the taking of life, the contemplative Gotama abstains from the taking of life. He dwells with his rod laid down, his knife laid down, scrupulous, merciful, compassionate for the welfare of all living beings.’
dn1:1.8.2 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.8.3 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has given up stealing. He takes only what’s given, and expects only what’s given. He keeps himself clean by not thieving.’ | T: “Or: ‘Abandoning the taking of what is not given, the contemplative Gotama abstains from taking what is not given. He takes only what is given, accepts only what is given, lives not by stealth but by means of a self that has become pure.’
dn1:1.8.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.8.5 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has given up unchastity. He is chaste, set apart, refraining from the vulgar act of sex.’ | T: “Or: ‘Abandoning uncelibacy, the contemplative Gotama lives a celibate life, aloof, refraining from the sexual act that is the villager’s way.’
dn1:1.8.6 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.9.1 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has given up lying. He speaks the truth and sticks to the truth. He’s honest and dependable, and doesn’t trick the world with his words.’ | T: “Or: ‘Abandoning false speech, the contemplative Gotama abstains from false speech. He speaks the truth, holds to the truth, is firm, reliable, no deceiver of the world.’
dn1:1.9.2 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.9.3 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has given up backbiting. He doesn’t repeat in one place what he heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead, he reconciles those who are divided and support those who are united, delighting in harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony.’ | T: “Or: ‘Abandoning divisive speech, the contemplative Gotama abstains from divisive speech. What he has heard here he does not tell there to break those people apart from these people here. What he has heard there he does not tell here to break these people apart from those people there. Thus reconciling those who have broken apart or cementing those who are united, he loves concord, delights in concord, enjoys concord, speaks things that create concord.’
dn1:1.9.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.9.5 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has given up harsh speech. He speaks in a way that’s mellow, pleasing to the ear, endearing, going to the heart, polite, and likable and agreeable to the people.’ | T: “Or: ‘Abandoning abusive speech, the contemplative Gotama abstains from abusive speech. He speaks words that are soothing to the ear, that are affectionate, that go to the heart, that are polite, appealing, & pleasing to people at large.’
dn1:1.9.6 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.9.7 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama has given up talking nonsense. His words are timely, true, and meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. He says things at the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial.’ | T: “Or: ‘Abandoning idle chatter, he abstains from idle chatter. He speaks in season, speaks what is factual, what is in accordance with the goal [attha], the Dhamma, & the Vinaya. He speaks words worth treasuring, seasonable, reasonable, circumscribed, connected with what is profitable [attha].’
dn1:1.9.8 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.10.1 | S: ‘The ascetic Gotama refrains from injuring plants and seeds.’ | T: “Or: ‘The contemplative Gotama abstains from damaging seed & plant life.’…
dn1:1.10.2 | P: iti vā hi, bhikkhave …pe…. | T: (none)
dn1:1.10.3 | S: ‘He eats in one part of the day, abstaining from eating at night and food at the wrong time.’ | T: “Or: ‘The contemplative Gotama eats only once a day, refraining from the evening meal and from food at the wrong time of day.’…
dn1:1.10.4 | S: ‘He refrains from seeing shows of dancing, singing, and music.’ | T: “Or: ‘The contemplative Gotama abstains from dancing, singing, instrumental music, and from watching shows.’…
dn1:1.10.5 | S: ‘He refrains from attiring and adorning himself with garlands, fragrance, and makeup.’ | T: “Or: ‘The contemplative Gotama abstains from wearing garlands and from beautifying himself with scents & cosmetics.’…
dn1:1.10.6 | S: ‘He refrains from high and luxurious beds.’ | T: “Or: ‘The contemplative Gotama abstains from high and luxurious beds & seats.’…
dn1:1.10.7 | S: ‘He refrains from receiving gold and currency, | T: “Or: ‘The contemplative Gotama abstains from accepting gold & money.’…
dn1:1.10.8 | S: raw grains, | T: “Or: ‘The contemplative Gotama abstains from accepting uncooked grain…
dn1:1.10.9 | S: raw meat, | T: raw meat…
dn1:1.10.10 | S: women and girls, | T: women & girls…
dn1:1.10.11 | S: male and female bondservants, | T: male & female slaves…
dn1:1.10.12 | S: goats and sheep, | T: goats & sheep…
dn1:1.10.13 | S: chickens and pigs, | T: fowl & pigs…
dn1:1.10.14 | S: elephants, cows, horses, and mares, | T: elephants, cattle, steeds, & mares…
dn1:1.10.15 | S: and fields and land.’ | T: fields & property.’…
dn1:1.10.16 | S: ‘He refrains from running errands and messages; | T: “Or: ‘The contemplative Gotama abstains from running messages…
dn1:1.10.17 | S: buying and selling; | T: from buying & selling…
dn1:1.10.18 | S: falsifying weights, metals, or measures; | T: from dealing with false scales, false metals, & false measures…
dn1:1.10.19 | S: bribery, fraud, cheating, and duplicity; | T: from bribery, deception, & fraud.’…
dn1:1.10.20 | S: mutilation, murder, abduction, banditry, plunder, and violence.’ | T: “Or: ‘The contemplative Gotama abstains from mutilating, executing, imprisoning, highway robbery, plunder, & violence.’
dn1:1.10.21 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.10.22 | S: The shorter section on ethics is complete. | T: (none)
dn1:1.11.0 | S: 2.2. The Middle Section on Ethics | T: The Intermediate Section on Virtue
dn1:1.11.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in injuring plants and seeds. | T: “Or: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, remain addicted to damaging seed & plant life such as these—
dn1:1.11.2 | S: These include plants propagated from roots, trunks, cuttings, or joints; and those from regular seeds as the fifth. | T: plants propagated from roots, stems, joints, buddings, & seeds—
dn1:1.11.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such injury to plants and seeds.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from damaging seed and plant life such as these.’
dn1:1.11.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.12.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in storing up goods for their own use. | T: “Or: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, remain addicted to consuming stored-up goods such as these—
dn1:1.12.2 | S: This includes such things as food, drink, clothes, vehicles, bedding, fragrance, and things of the flesh. | T: stored-up food, stored-up drinks, stored-up clothing, stored-up vehicles, stored-up bedding, stored-up scents, & stored-up meat—
dn1:1.12.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from storing up such goods.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from consuming stored-up goods such as these.’
dn1:1.12.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.13.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in seeing shows. | T: “Or: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, remain addicted to watching shows such as these—
dn1:1.13.2 | S: This includes such things as dancing, singing, music, performances, and storytelling; clapping, gongs, and kettledrums; beauty pageants; pole-acrobatics and bone-washing displays of the corpse-workers; battles of elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, goats, rams, chickens, and quails; staff-fights, boxing, and wrestling; combat, roll calls of the armed forces, battle-formations, and regimental reviews. | T: dancing, singing, instrumental music, plays, ballad recitations, hand-clapping, cymbals & drums, magic-lantern scenes, acrobatic and conjuring tricks, elephant fights, horse fights, buffalo fights, bull fights, goat fights, ram fights, cock fights, quail fights; fighting with staves, boxing, wrestling, war-games, roll calls, battle arrays, & regimental reviews—
dn1:1.13.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such shows.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from watching shows such as these.’
dn1:1.13.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.14.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in gambling that causes negligence. | T: “Or: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, remain addicted to heedless & idle games such as these—
dn1:1.14.2 | S: This includes such things as checkers with eight or ten rows, checkers in the air, hopscotch, spillikins, board-games, tip-cat, drawing straws, dice, leaf-flutes, toy plows, somersaults, pinwheels, toy measures, toy carts, toy bows, guessing words from syllables, guessing another’s thoughts, and imitating musical instruments. | T: eight-row chess, ten-row chess, chess in the air, hopscotch, spillikins, dice, stick games, hand-pictures, ball-games, blowing through toy pipes, playing with toy plows, turning somersaults, playing with toy windmills, toy measures, toy chariots, toy bows, guessing letters drawn in the air, guessing thoughts, mimicking deformities—
dn1:1.14.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such gambling.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from heedless & idle games such as these.’
dn1:1.14.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.15.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still make use of high and luxurious bedding. | T: “Or: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, remain addicted to high & luxurious furnishings such as these—
dn1:1.15.2 | S: This includes such things as sofas, couches, woolen covers—shag-piled, colorful, white, embroidered with flowers, quilted, embroidered with animals, double or single fringed—and silk covers studded with gems, as well as silken sheets, woollen carpets, rugs for elephants, horses, or chariots, black antelope hides and woven rugs, and spreads of fine deer hide, with a canopy above and red cushions at both ends. | T: over-sized couches, couches adorned with carved animals, long-haired coverlets, multi-colored patchwork coverlets, white woolen coverlets, woolen coverlets embroidered with flowers or animal figures, stuffed quilts, coverlets with fringe, silk coverlets embroidered with gems; large woolen carpets; elephant, horse, and chariot rugs, antelope-hide rugs, deer-hide rugs; couches with canopies, couches with red cushions for the head & feet—
dn1:1.15.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such bedding.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from using high and luxurious furnishings such as these.’
dn1:1.15.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.16.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in attiring and adorning themselves with garlands, fragrance, and makeup. | T: “Or: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, remain addicted to scents, cosmetics, and means of beautification such as these—
dn1:1.16.2 | S: This includes such things as applying beauty products by anointing, massaging, bathing, and rubbing; mirrors, ointments, garlands, fragrances, and makeup; face-powder, foundation, bracelets, headbands, fancy walking-sticks or containers, rapiers, parasols, fancy sandals, turbans, jewelry, chowries, and long-fringed white robes. | T: rubbing powders into the body, massaging with oils, bathing in perfumed water, kneading the limbs, using mirrors, ointments, garlands, scents, creams, face-powders, mascara, bracelets, head-bands, decorated walking sticks, ornamented water-bottles, swords, fancy sunshades, decorated sandals, turbans, gems, yak-tail whisks, long-fringed white robes—
dn1:1.16.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such beautification and adornment.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from using scents, cosmetics, and means of beautification such as these.’
dn1:1.16.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.17.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in low talk. This includes such topics as | T: “Or: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, remain addicted to talking about “animal” topics such as these—
dn1:1.17.2 | S: talk about kings, bandits, and chief ministers; talk about armies, threats, and wars; talk about food, drink, clothes, and beds; talk about garlands and fragrances; talk about family, vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and countries; talk about women and heroes; talk at the street market and the place for water pots; talk about the departed; motley talk; tales of land and sea; and talk about being reborn in this or that place. | T: talking about kings, robbers, ministers of state; armies, alarms, and battles; food and drink; clothing, furniture, garlands, and scents; relatives; vehicles; villages, towns, cities, the countryside; women and heroes; the gossip of the street and the well; tales of the dead; tales of diversity [philosophical discussions of the past and future], the creation of the world & of the sea, and talk of whether things exist or not—
dn1:1.17.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low talk.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from talking about “animal” topics such as these.’
dn1:1.17.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.18.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in arguments. | T: “Or: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, remain addicted to debates such as these—
dn1:1.18.2 | S: They say such things as: “You don’t understand this teaching and training. I understand this teaching and training. What, you understand this teaching and training? You’re practicing wrong. I’m practicing right. I stay on topic, you don’t. You said last what you should have said first. You said first what you should have said last. What you’ve thought so much about has been disproved. Your doctrine is refuted. Go on, save your doctrine! You’re trapped; get yourself out of this—if you can!” | T: “You understand this doctrine & discipline? I’m the one who understands this doctrine & discipline. How could you understand this doctrine & discipline? You’re practicing wrongly. I’m practicing rightly. I’m being consistent. You’re not. What should be said first you said last. What should be said last you said first. What you took so long to think out has been refuted. Your doctrine has been overthrown. You’re defeated. Go and try to salvage your doctrine or extricate yourself if you can!”—
dn1:1.18.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such argumentative talk.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from debates such as these.’
dn1:1.18.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.19.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in running errands and messages. | T: “Or: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, remain addicted to running messages & errands for people such as these—
dn1:1.19.2 | S: This includes running errands for rulers, ministers, aristocrats, brahmins, householders, or princes who say: “Go here, go there. Take this, bring that from there.” | T: kings, ministers of state, noble warriors, brahmans, householders, or youths (who say), “Go here. Go there. Take this there. Fetch that here”—
dn1:1.19.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such errands.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from running messages & errands for people such as these.’
dn1:1.19.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.20.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still engage in deceit, flattery, hinting, and belittling, and using material things to chase after other material things. | T: “Or: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, engage in scheming, persuading, hinting, belittling, & pursuing gain with gain,
dn1:1.20.2 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such fawning and flattery.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from forms of scheming & persuading [improper ways of trying to gain material support from donors] such as these.’
dn1:1.20.3 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.20.4 | S: The middle section on ethics is complete. | T: (none)
dn1:1.21.0 | S: 2.3. The Large Section on Ethics | T: The Great Section on Virtue
dn1:1.21.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: “Or: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, maintain themselves by wrong livelihood, by such “animal” arts as:
dn1:1.21.2 | S: This includes such fields as augury, omenology, divining portents, interpreting dreams, divining features of men and women, divining holes in cloth gnawed by mice, fire offerings, ladle offerings, offerings of husks, rice powder, rice, ghee, or oil; offerings from the mouth, blood sacrifices, limb-reading; geomancy for building sites, fields, and cemeteries; exorcisms, earth magic, snake charming, poisons; the lore of the scorpion, the rat, the bird, and the crow; prophesying lifespan, chanting for protection, and divining omens from wild animals. | T: reading marks on the limbs [e.g., palmistry]; reading omens & signs; interpreting celestial events [falling stars, comets]; interpreting dreams; reading features of the body [e.g., phrenology]; reading marks on cloth gnawed by mice; offering fire oblations, oblations from a ladle, oblations of husks, rice powder, rice grains, ghee, & oil; offering oblations from the mouth; offering blood-sacrifices; making predictions based on the fingertips; geomancy; making predictions for state officials; laying demons in a cemetery; placing spells on spirits; earth-skills [divining water and gems?]; snake-skills, poison-skills, scorpion-skills, rat-skills, bird-skills, crow-skills; predicting life spans; giving protective charms; casting horoscopes—
dn1:1.21.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from wrong livelihood, from “animal” arts such as these.’
dn1:1.21.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: (none)
dn1:1.22.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: “Or: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, maintain themselves by wrong livelihood, by such “animal” arts as:
dn1:1.22.2 | S: This includes reading the marks of gems, cloth, clubs, swords, spears, arrows, bows, weapons, women, men, boys, girls, male and female bondservants, elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, cows, goats, rams, chickens, quails, monitor lizards, rabbits, tortoises, or deer. | T: determining lucky & unlucky gems, staffs, garments, swords, arrows, bows, & other weapons; women, men, boys, girls, male slaves, female slaves; elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, cows, goats, rams, fowl, quails, lizards, rabbits, tortoises, & other animals—
dn1:1.22.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from wrong livelihood, from “animal” arts such as these.’
dn1:1.22.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: (none)
dn1:1.23.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: “Or: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, maintain themselves by wrong livelihood, by such “animal” arts as (forecasting):
dn1:1.23.2 | S: This includes making predictions that the king will march forth or march back; or that our king will attack and the enemy king will retreat, or vice versa; or that our king will triumph and the enemy king will be defeated, or vice versa; and so there will be victory for one and defeat for the other. | T: the rulers will march forth; the rulers will not march forth; our rulers will attack, and their rulers will retreat; their rulers will attack, and our rulers will retreat; there will be triumph for our rulers and defeat for their rulers; there will be triumph for their rulers and defeat for our rulers; thus there will be triumph for this one, defeat for that one—
dn1:1.23.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from wrong livelihood, from “animal” arts such as these.’
dn1:1.23.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: (none)
dn1:1.24.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: “Or: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, maintain themselves by wrong livelihood, by such “animal” arts as (forecasting):
dn1:1.24.2 | S: This includes making predictions that there will be an eclipse of the moon, or sun, or stars; that the sun, moon, and stars will be in conjunction or in opposition; that there will be a meteor shower, a fiery horizon, an earthquake, or thunder in the heavens; that there will be a rising, a setting, a darkening, a brightening of the moon, sun, and stars. And it also includes making predictions about the results of all such phenomena. | T: there will be a lunar eclipse; there will be a solar eclipse; there will be an occultation of [a conjunction of the moon or a planet with] an asterism; the sun & moon will be favorable; the sun & moon will be unfavorable; the asterisms will be favorable; the asterisms will be unfavorable; there will be a meteor shower; there will be a flickering light on the horizon [an aurora?]; there will be an earthquake; there will be thunder coming from dry clouds; there will be a rising, a setting, a darkening, a brightening of the sun, moon, & asterisms; such will be the result of the lunar eclipse… the rising, setting, darkening, brightening of the sun, moon, & asterisms—
dn1:1.24.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from wrong livelihood, from “animal” arts such as these.’
dn1:1.24.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or:
dn1:1.25.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, maintain themselves by wrong livelihood, by such “animal” arts as (forecasting):
dn1:1.25.2 | S: This includes predicting whether there will be plenty of rain or drought; plenty to eat or famine; an abundant harvest or a bad harvest; security or peril; sickness or health. It also includes such occupations as arithmetic, accounting, calculating, poetry, and cosmology. | T: there will be abundant rain; there will be a drought; there will be plenty; there will be famine; there will be rest and security; there will be danger; there will be disease; there will be freedom from disease; or they earn their living by accounting, counting, calculation, composing poetry, or teaching hedonistic arts & doctrines [lokāyata]—
dn1:1.25.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from wrong livelihood, from “animal” arts such as these.’
dn1:1.25.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or:
dn1:1.26.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, maintain themselves by wrong livelihood, by such “animal” arts as:
dn1:1.26.2 | S: This includes making arrangements for giving and taking in marriage; for engagement and divorce; and for scattering rice inwards or outwards at the wedding ceremony. It also includes casting spells for good or bad luck, treating impacted fetuses, binding the tongue, or locking the jaws; charms for the hands and ears; questioning a mirror, a girl, or a god as an oracle; worshiping the sun, worshiping the Great One, breathing fire, and invoking Siri, the goddess of luck. | T: calculating auspicious dates for marriages—both those in which the bride is brought home and those in which she is sent out; calculating auspicious dates for betrothals and divorces; for collecting debts or making investments and loans; reciting charms to make people attractive or unattractive; curing women who have undergone miscarriages or abortions; reciting spells to bind a man’s tongue, to paralyze his jaws, to make him lose control over his hands, or to bring on deafness; getting oracular answers to questions addressed to a spirit in a mirror, in a young girl, or to a spirit medium; worshipping the sun, worshipping the Great Brahmā, bringing forth flames from the mouth, invoking the goddess of luck—
dn1:1.26.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from wrong livelihood, from “animal” arts such as these.’
dn1:1.26.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “Or:
dn1:1.27.1 | S: ‘There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. | T: ‘Whereas some contemplatives & brahmans, living off food given in faith, maintain themselves by wrong livelihood, by such “animal” arts as:
dn1:1.27.2 | S: This includes rites for propitiation, for granting wishes, for ghosts, for the earth, for rain, for property settlement, and for preparing and consecrating house sites, and rites involving sipping water and bathing, and oblations. It also includes administering emetics, purgatives, expectorants, and phlegmagogues; administering ear-oils, eye restoratives, nasal medicine, ointments, and counter-ointments; surgery with needle and scalpel, treating children, prescribing root medicines, and herbal bandages. | T: promising gifts to deities in return for favors; fulfilling such promises; demonology; reciting spells in earth houses [see earth skills, above]; inducing virility and impotence; preparing sites for construction; consecrating sites for construction; giving ceremonial mouthwashes & ceremonial baths; offering sacrificial fires; administering emetics, purges, purges from above, purges from below, head-purges; ear-oil, eye-drops, treatments through the nose, ointments, and counter-ointments; practicing eye-surgery [or: extractive surgery], general surgery, pediatrics; administering root-medicines and binding medicinal herbs—
dn1:1.27.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.’ | T: the contemplative Gotama abstains from wrong livelihood, from “animal” arts such as these.’
dn1:1.27.4 | S: Such is an ordinary person’s praise of the Realized One. | T: “It’s of this, monks, that a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.27.5 | S: These are the trivial, trifling details of mere ethics that an ordinary person speaks of when they speak praise of the Realized One. | T: “These are the minor matters, lower matters, matters of virtue, of which a run-of-the-mill person, when praising the Tathāgata, would speak.
dn1:1.27.6 | S: The longer section on ethics is complete. | T: (none)
dn1:1.28.0.1 | S: 3. Views | T: View Standpoints
dn1:1.28.0.2 | S: 3.1. Theories About the First Beginning | T: (none)
dn1:1.28.1 | S: There are other principles—deep, hard to see, hard to understand, peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of logic, subtle, comprehensible to the astute—which the Realized One makes known after realizing them with his own insight. Those who genuinely praise the Realized One would rightly speak of these things. | T: “There are, monks, other dhammas—deep, hard to see, hard to realize, tranquil, refined, beyond the scope of conjecture, subtle, to-be-experienced by the wise—that the Tathāgata proclaims, having directly known & realized them for himself, and that those who, rightly speaking in praise of the Tathāgata in line with what is factual, would speak.
dn1:1.28.2 | S: And what are these principles? | T: And what are those dhammas—deep, hard to see, hard to realize, tranquil, refined, beyond the scope of conjecture, subtle, to-be-experienced by the wise—that the Tathāgata proclaims, having directly known & realized them for himself, and that those who, rightly speaking in praise of the Tathāgata in line with what is factual, would speak?
dn1:1.29.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who speculate and theorize about the first beginning, and propose various hypotheses concerning the first beginning on eighteen grounds. | T: Theorists about the Past “There are some contemplatives & brahmans who are theorists about the past, who hold views about the past, who approve of various beliefs with reference to the past on 18 grounds.
dn1:1.29.2 | S: And what are the eighteen grounds on which they rely? | T: And with reference to what, coming from what, are these honorable contemplatives & brahmans theorists about the past who hold views about the past, who approve of various beliefs with reference to the past on 18 grounds?
dn1:1.30.0 | S: 3.1.1. Eternalism | T: Eternalism
dn1:1.30.1 | S: There are some ascetics and brahmins who are eternalists, who assert that the self and the cosmos are eternal on four grounds. | T: “There are some contemplatives & brahmans who are adherents of eternalism, who proclaim an eternal self & cosmos on four grounds.
dn1:1.30.2 | S: And what are the four grounds on which they rely? | T: And with reference to what, coming from what, are these honorable contemplatives & brahmans adherents of eternalism who proclaim an eternal self & cosmos on four grounds? 1.
dn1:1.31.1 | S: It’s when some ascetic or brahmin—by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind—experiences an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they recollect their many kinds of past lives. | T: “There is the case where a certain contemplative or brahman—through ardency, through exertion, through commitment, through heedfulness, through right attention—touches an awareness-concentration such that in his concentrated mind—purified, bright, unblemished, rid of defilement—he remembers many past lives,
dn1:1.31.2 | S: That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths. They remember: ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ And so they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details. | T: i.e., one birth, two… five, ten… fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand, many hundreds, many thousands, many hundred thousands: ‘There I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance. Such was my food, such my experience of pleasure & pain, such the end of my life. Passing away from that state, I re-arose there. There too I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance. Such was my food, such my experience of pleasure & pain, such the end of my life. Passing away from that state, I re-arose here.’ Thus he recollects his manifold past lives in their modes & details.
dn1:1.31.3 | S: They say: | T: “He says:
dn1:1.31.4 | S: ‘The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. | T: ‘The self & the cosmos are eternal, barren, stable as a mountain-peak, standing firm like a pillar.
dn1:1.31.5 | S: They remain the same for all eternity, while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and rearise. | T: And although beings transmigrate, wander on, die, & reappear, there still is that which is for eternity.
dn1:1.31.6 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
dn1:1.31.7 | S: Because by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind I experience an immersion of the heart of such a kind that I recollect my many kinds of past lives, | T: Because I—through ardency, through exertion, through commitment, through heedfulness, through right attention—touch an awareness-concentration such that in my concentrated mind—purified, bright, unblemished, rid of defilement—I remember many past lives, i.e., one birth, two… five, ten… fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand, many hundreds, many thousands, many hundred thousands: ‘There I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance. Such was my food, such my experience of pleasure & pain, such the end of my life. Passing away from that state, I re-arose there. There too I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance. Such was my food, such my experience of pleasure & pain, such the end of my life. Passing away from that state, I re-arose here.’
dn1:1.31.8 | S: with features and details. | T: Thus I recollect my manifold past lives in their modes & details.
dn1:1.31.9 | S: Because of this I know: | T: By means of this I know how
dn1:1.31.10 | S: “The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. | T: the self & the cosmos are eternal, barren, stable as a mountain-peak, standing firm like a pillar.
dn1:1.31.11 | S: They remain the same for all eternity, while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and rearise.”’ | T: And although beings transmigrate, wander on, die, & reappear, there still is that which is for eternity.’
dn1:1.31.12 | S: This is the first ground on which some ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that the self and the cosmos are eternal. | T: “This is the first basis—with reference to which, coming from which—some contemplatives & brahmans are adherents of eternalism who proclaim an eternal self & cosmos.
dn1:1.32.1 | S: And what is the second ground on which they rely? | T: 2. “As for the second: With reference to what, coming from what, are honorable contemplatives & brahmans adherents of eternalism who proclaim an eternal self & cosmos?
dn1:1.32.2 | S: It’s when some ascetic or brahmin—by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind—experiences an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they recollect their many kinds of past lives. | T: “There is the case where a certain contemplative or brahman—through ardency, through exertion, through commitment, through heedfulness, through right attention—touches an awareness-concentration such that in his concentrated mind—purified, bright, unblemished, rid of defilement—he remembers many past lives,
dn1:1.32.3 | S: That is: one eon of the cosmos contracting and expanding; two, three, four, five, or ten eons of the cosmos contracting and expanding. They remember: ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ And so they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details. | T: i.e., one eon of cosmic contraction & expansion, two eons… three… four… five… six… seven… eight… nine… ten eons of cosmic contraction & expansion.…
dn1:1.32.4 | S: They say: | T: “He says:
dn1:1.32.5 | S: ‘The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. | T: ‘The self & the cosmos are eternal, barren, stable as a mountain-peak, standing firm like a pillar.
