## an8.118
an8.118:1.1 | S: “For insight into greed, eight things should be developed. | T: “Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, eight things are to be developed.
an8.118:1.2 | S: What eight? | T: What eight?
an8.118:1.3 | S: Right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. | T: Right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
an8.118:1.4 | S: For insight into greed, these eight things should be developed.” | T: For direct knowledge of lust, these eight things are to be developed.”

## an8.11
an8.11:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
an8.11:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying in Verañjā at the root of a neem tree dedicated to Naḷeru. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Verañjā at the foot of Naḷeru’s neem tree.
an8.11:1.3 | S: Then the brahmin Verañja went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. | T: Then a brahmin of Verañjā approached the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him.
an8.11:1.4 | S: When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha: | T: When he had concluded his greetings and cordial talk, he sat down to one side and said to the Blessed One:
an8.11:2.1 | S: “Worthy Gotama, I have heard that | T: “I have heard, Master Gotama:
an8.11:2.2 | S: the ascetic Gotama doesn’t bow to old brahmins, the elderly and senior, who are advanced in years and have reached the final stage of life; nor does he rise in their presence or offer them a seat. | T: ‘The ascetic Gotama does not pay homage to brahmins who are old, aged, burdened with years, advanced in life, come to the last stage; nor does he stand up for them or offer them a seat.’
an8.11:2.3 | S: And this is indeed the case, | T: This is indeed true,
an8.11:2.4 | S: for the worthy Gotama does not bow to old brahmins, elderly and senior, who are advanced in years and have reached the final stage of life; nor does he rise in their presence or offer them a seat. | T: for Master Gotama does not pay homage to brahmins who are old, aged, burdened with years, advanced in life, come to the last stage; nor does he stand up for them or offer them a seat.
an8.11:2.5 | S: This is not appropriate, worthy Gotama.” | T: This is not proper, Master Gotama.”
an8.11:2.6 | S: “Brahmin, I don’t see anyone in this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans—for whom I should bow down or rise up or offer a seat. | T: “Brahmin, in the world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, in this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans, I do not see one to whom I should pay homage, or for whom I should stand up, or whom I should offer a seat.
an8.11:2.7 | S: If the Realized One bowed down or rose up or offered a seat to anyone, their head would explode!” | T: For if the Tathāgata should pay homage to anyone, or stand up for him, or offer him a seat, even that person’s head would split.”
an8.11:3.1 | S: “Worthy Gotama lacks taste.” | T: (1) “Master Gotama lacks taste.”
an8.11:3.2 | S: “There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say | T: “There is, brahmin, a way in which one could rightly say of me:
an8.11:3.3 | S: that I lack taste. | T: ‘The ascetic Gotama lacks taste.’
an8.11:3.4 | S: For the Realized One has given up taste for sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches. It’s cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. | T: The Tathāgata has abandoned his taste for forms, sounds, odors, tastes, and tactile objects; he has cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising.
an8.11:3.5 | S: In this sense you could rightly say that I lack taste. | T: It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama lacks taste.’
an8.11:3.6 | S: But that’s not what you’re talking about.” | T: But you did not speak with reference to this.”
an8.11:4.1 | S: “Worthy Gotama is indelicate.” | T: (2) “Master Gotama is not convivial.”
an8.11:4.2 | S: “There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say | T: “There is, brahmin, a way in which one could rightly say of me:
an8.11:4.3 | S: that I’m indelicate. | T: ‘The ascetic Gotama is not convivial.’
an8.11:4.4 | S: For the Realized One has given up delight in sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches. It’s cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. | T: The Tathāgata has abandoned conviviality with forms, sounds, odors, tastes, and tactile objects; he has cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising.
an8.11:4.5 | S: In this sense you could rightly say that I’m indelicate. | T: It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is not convivial.’
an8.11:4.6 | S: But that’s not what you’re talking about.” | T: But you did not speak with reference to this.”
an8.11:5.1 | S: “Worthy Gotama is a teacher of inaction.” | T: (3) “Master Gotama is a proponent of non-doing.”
an8.11:5.2 | S: “There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say that | T: “There is, brahmin, a way in which one could rightly say of me:
an8.11:5.3 | S: I’m a teacher of inaction. | T: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a proponent of non-doing.’
an8.11:5.4 | S: For I teach inaction regarding bad bodily, verbal, and mental conduct, and the many kinds of unskillful things. | T: For I assert the non-doing of bodily, verbal, and mental misconduct; I assert the non-doing of the numerous kinds of bad unwholesome deeds.
an8.11:5.5 | S: In this sense you could rightly say that I’m a teacher of inaction. | T: It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a proponent of non-doing.’
an8.11:5.6 | S: But that’s not what you’re talking about.” | T: But you did not speak with reference to this.”
an8.11:6.1 | S: “Worthy Gotama is a teacher of annihilationism.” | T: (4) “Master Gotama is an annihilationist.”
an8.11:6.2 | S: “There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say that | T: “There is, brahmin, a way in which one could rightly say of me:
an8.11:6.3 | S: I’m a teacher of annihilationism. | T: ‘The ascetic Gotama is an annihilationist.’
an8.11:6.4 | S: For I teach the annihilation of greed, hate, and delusion, and the many kinds of unskillful things. | T: For I assert the annihilation of lust, hatred, and delusion; I assert the annihilation of the numerous kinds of bad unwholesome qualities.
an8.11:6.5 | S: In this sense you could rightly say that I’m a teacher of annihilationism. | T: It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is an annihilationist.’
an8.11:6.6 | S: But that’s not what you’re talking about.” | T: But you did not speak with reference to this.”
an8.11:7.1 | S: “Worthy Gotama is disgusted.” | T: (5) “Master Gotama is a repeller.”
an8.11:7.2 | S: “There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say that | T: “There is, brahmin, a way in which one could rightly say of me:
an8.11:7.3 | S: I’m disgusted. | T: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a repeller.’
an8.11:7.4 | S: For I’m disgusted by bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and by attainment of the many kinds of unskillful things. | T: For I am repelled by bodily, verbal, and mental misconduct; I am repelled by the acquisition of the numerous kinds of bad unwholesome qualities.
an8.11:7.5 | S: In this sense you could rightly say that I’m disgusted. | T: It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a repeller.’
an8.11:7.6 | S: But that’s not what you’re talking about.” | T: But you did not speak with reference to this.”
an8.11:8.1 | S: “Worthy Gotama is an exterminator.” | T: (6) “Master Gotama is an abolitionist.”
an8.11:8.2 | S: “There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say that | T: “There is, brahmin, a way in which one could rightly say of me:
an8.11:8.3 | S: I’m an exterminator. | T: ‘The ascetic Gotama is an abolitionist.’
an8.11:8.4 | S: For I teach the extermination of greed, hate, and delusion, and the many kinds of unskillful things. | T: For I teach the Dhamma for the abolition of lust, hatred, and delusion; I teach the Dhamma for the abolition of the numerous kinds of bad unwholesome qualities.
an8.11:8.5 | S: In this sense you could rightly say that I’m an exterminator. | T: It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is an abolitionist.’
an8.11:8.6 | S: But that’s not what you’re talking about.” | T: But you did not speak with reference to this.”
an8.11:9.1 | S: “Worthy Gotama is a mortifier.” | T: (7) “Master Gotama is a tormentor.”
an8.11:9.2 | S: “There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say that | T: “There is, brahmin, a way in which one could rightly say of me:
an8.11:9.3 | S: I’m a mortifier. | T: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a tormentor.’
an8.11:9.4 | S: For I say that bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind should be mortified. | T: For I assert that bad unwholesome qualities—bodily, verbal, and mental misconduct—are to be burned up.
an8.11:9.5 | S: I say that a mortifier is someone who has given up unskillful qualities that should be mortified. They’ve cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so that they’re unable to arise in the future. | T: I say that someone is a tormentor when he has abandoned the bad unwholesome qualities that are to be burned up; when he has cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them so that they are no more subject to future arising.
an8.11:9.6 | S: The Realized One is someone who has given up unskillful qualities that should be mortified. He has cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so that they’re unable to arise in the future. | T: The Tathāgata has abandoned the bad unwholesome qualities that are to be burned up; he has cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them so that they are no more subject to future arising.
an8.11:9.7 | S: In this sense you could rightly say that I’m a mortifier. | T: It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a tormentor.’
an8.11:9.8 | S: But that’s not what you’re talking about.” | T: But you did not speak with reference to this.”
an8.11:10.1 | S: “Worthy Gotama is gutless.” | T: (8) “Master Gotama is retiring.”
an8.11:10.2 | S: “There is, brahmin, a sense in which you could rightly say that | T: “There is, brahmin, a way in which one could rightly say of me:
an8.11:10.3 | S: I am gutless. | T: ‘The ascetic Gotama is retiring.’
an8.11:10.4 | S: I say that a gutless person is someone who has given up future wombs and regeneration into a new state of existence. They’ve cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so that they’re unable to arise in the future. | T: For I say that someone is retiring when he has abandoned the production of renewed existence, the future bed of the womb; when he has cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising.
an8.11:10.5 | S: The Realized One has given up future wombs and regeneration into a new state of existence. He has cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so that they’re unable to arise in the future. | T: The Tathāgata has abandoned the production of renewed existence, the future bed of the womb; he has cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising.
an8.11:10.6 | S: In this sense you could rightly say that I am gutless. | T: It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is retiring.’
an8.11:10.7 | S: But that’s not what you’re talking about. | T: But you did not speak with reference to this.
an8.11:11.1 | S: Suppose, brahmin, there was a chicken with eight or ten or twelve eggs. | T: “Suppose, brahmin, there was a hen with eight, ten, or twelve eggs
an8.11:11.2 | S: And she properly sat on them to keep them warm and incubated. | T: that she had properly covered, incubated, and nurtured.
an8.11:11.3 | S: Now, the chick that is first to break out of the eggshell with its claws and beak and hatch safely: should that be called the eldest or the youngest?” | T: Should the first among those chicks to pierce its shell with the points of its claws or beak and safely hatch be called the eldest or the youngest?”
an8.11:11.4 | S: “Worthy Gotama, that should be called the eldest. For it is the eldest among them.” | T: “It should be called the eldest, Master Gotama. So it is the eldest among them.”
an8.11:12.1 | S: “In the same way, in this population lost in ignorance, swaddled in their shells, I alone have broken open the egg of ignorance and realized the supreme perfect awakening. | T: “So too, brahmin, in a population immersed in ignorance, become like an egg, completely enveloped, I have pierced the eggshell of ignorance. I am the sole person in the world who has awakened to the unsurpassed perfect enlightenment.
an8.11:12.2 | S: So, brahmin, I am the eldest and the first in the world. | T: So I am the eldest, the best in the world.
an8.11:13.1 | S: My energy was roused up and unflagging, my mindfulness was established and lucid, my body was tranquil and undisturbed, and my mind was immersed and unified in samādhi. | T: “My energy, brahmin, was aroused without slackening; my mindfulness was established without confusion; my body was tranquil without disturbance; my mind was concentrated and one-pointed.
an8.11:13.2 | S: Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, I entered and remained in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: Secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, I entered and dwelled in the first jhāna, which consists of rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by thought and examination.
an8.11:13.3 | S: As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected were stilled, I entered and remained in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: With the subsiding of thought and examination, I entered and dwelled in the second jhāna, which has internal placidity and unification of mind and consists of rapture and pleasure born of concentration, without thought and examination.
an8.11:13.4 | S: And with the fading away of rapture, I entered and remained in the third absorption, where I meditated with equanimity, mindful and aware, experiencing for themselves the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’ | T: With the fading away as well of rapture, I dwelled equanimous and, mindful and clearly comprehending, I experienced pleasure with the body; I entered and dwelled in the third jhāna of which the noble ones declare: ‘He is equanimous, mindful, one who dwells happily.’
an8.11:13.5 | S: With the giving up of pleasure and pain, and the disappearance of former happiness and sadness, I entered and remained in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. | T: With the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous passing away of joy and dejection, I entered and dwelled in the fourth jhāna, neither painful nor pleasant, which has purification of mindfulness by equanimity.
an8.11:14.1 | S: When my mind had immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—I extended it toward recollection of past lives. | T: “When my mind was thus concentrated, purified, cleansed, unblemished, rid of defilement, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, I directed it to the knowledge of the recollection of past abodes.
an8.11:14.2 | S: I recollected many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. I remembered: ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ And so I recollected my many kinds of past lives, with features and details. | T: I recollected my manifold past abodes, that is, one birth, two births, three births, four births, five births, ten births, twenty births, thirty births, forty births, fifty births, a hundred births, a thousand births, a hundred thousand births, many eons of world-dissolution, many eons of world-evolution, many eons of world-dissolution and world-evolution thus: ‘There I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life span; passing away from there, I was reborn elsewhere, and there too I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life span; passing away from there, I was reborn here.’ Thus I recollected my manifold past abodes with their aspects and details.
an8.11:15.1 | S: This was the first knowledge, which I achieved in the first watch of the night. | T: “This, brahmin, was the first true knowledge attained by me in the first watch of the night.
an8.11:15.2 | S: Ignorance was banished and knowledge arose; darkness was banished and light arose, as happens for a meditator who is diligent, keen, and resolute. | T: Ignorance was dispelled, true knowledge had arisen; darkness was dispelled, light had arisen, as happens when one dwells heedful, ardent, and resolute.
an8.11:15.3 | S: This was my first breaking out, like a chick breaking out of the eggshell. | T: This, brahmin, was my first breaking out, like that of the chick breaking out of the eggshell.
an8.11:16.1 | S: When my mind had immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—I extended it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings. | T: “When my mind was thus concentrated, purified, cleansed, unblemished, rid of defilement, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, I directed it to the knowledge of the passing away and rebirth of beings.
an8.11:16.2 | S: With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, I saw sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. I understood how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds: ‘These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their body broke up, after death, they were reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’ And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, I saw sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. I understood how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. | T: With the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, I saw beings passing away and being reborn, inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and I understood how beings fare in accordance with their kamma thus: ‘These beings who engaged in misconduct by body, speech, and mind, who reviled the noble ones, held wrong view, and undertook kamma based on wrong view, with the breakup of the body, after death, have been reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell; but these beings who engaged in good conduct by body, speech, and mind, who did not revile the noble ones, who held right view, and undertook kamma based on right view, with the breakup of the body, after death, have been reborn in a good destination, in the heavenly world.’ Thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, I saw beings passing away and being reborn, inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and I understood how beings fare in accordance with their kamma.
an8.11:17.1 | S: This was the second knowledge, which I achieved in the middle watch of the night. | T: “This, brahmin, was the second true knowledge attained by me in the middle watch of the night.
an8.11:17.2 | S: Ignorance was banished and knowledge arose; darkness was banished and light arose, as happens for a meditator who is diligent, keen, and resolute. | T: Ignorance was dispelled, true knowledge had arisen; darkness was dispelled, light had arisen, as happens when one dwells heedful, ardent, and resolute.
an8.11:17.3 | S: This was my second breaking out, like a chick breaking out of the eggshell. | T: This, brahmin, was my second breaking out, like that of the chick breaking out of the eggshell.
an8.11:18.1 | S: When my mind had immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—I extended it toward knowledge of the ending of defilements. | T: “When my mind was thus concentrated, purified, cleansed, unblemished, rid of defilement, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, I directed it to the knowledge of the destruction of the taints.
an8.11:18.2 | S: I truly understood: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. | T: I understood as it really is: ‘This is suffering’; I understood as it really is: ‘This is the origin of suffering’; I understood as it really is: ‘This is the cessation of suffering’; I understood as it really is: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
an8.11:18.3 | S: I truly understood: ‘These are defilements’ … ‘This is the origin of defilements’ … ‘This is the cessation of defilements’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements’. | T: I understood as it really is: ‘These are the taints’; I understood as it really is: ‘This is the origin of the taints’; I understood as it really is: ‘This is the cessation of the taints’; I understood as it really is: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of the taints.’
an8.11:18.4 | S: Knowing and seeing like this, my mind was freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. | T: “When I knew and saw thus, my mind was liberated from the taint of sensuality, from the taint of existence, and from the taint of ignorance.
an8.11:18.5 | S: When it was freed, I knew it was freed. | T: When it was liberated there came the knowledge: ‘It’s liberated.’
an8.11:18.6 | S: I understood: ‘Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further for this place.’ | T: I directly knew: ‘Destroyed is birth, the spiritual life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming back to any state of being.’
an8.11:19.1 | S: This was the third knowledge, which I achieved in the last watch of the night. | T: “This, brahmin, was the third true knowledge attained by me in the last watch of the night.
an8.11:19.2 | S: Ignorance was banished and knowledge arose; darkness was banished and light arose, as happens for a meditator who is diligent, keen, and resolute. | T: Ignorance was dispelled, true knowledge had arisen; darkness was dispelled, light had arisen, as happens when one dwells heedful, ardent, and resolute.
an8.11:19.3 | S: This was my third breaking out, like a chick breaking out of the eggshell.” | T: This, brahmin, was my third breaking out, like that of the chick breaking out of the eggshell.”
an8.11:20.1 | S: When he said this, the brahmin Verañja said to the Buddha: | T: When this was said, the brahmin of Verañjā said to the Blessed One:
an8.11:20.2 | S: “The worthy Gotama is the eldest! The worthy Gotama is the best! | T: “Master Gotama is the eldest! Master Gotama is the best!
an8.11:20.3 | S: Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! | T: Excellent, Master Gotama! Excellent, Master Gotama!
an8.11:20.4 | S: As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, worthy Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. | T: Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the darkness so those with good eyesight can see forms.
an8.11:20.5 | S: I go for refuge to the worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. | T: I now go for refuge to Master Gotama, to the Dhamma, and to the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
an8.11:20.6 | S: From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” | T: Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
an8.11:20.7 | P: Paṭhamaṁ. | T: (none)

## an8.121-147
an8.121-147:1.1 | S: “For the complete understanding of greed … | T: “Bhikkhus, for full understanding of lust …
an8.121-147:1.2 | S: complete ending … | T: for the utter destruction …
an8.121-147:1.3 | S: giving up … | T: for the abandoning …
an8.121-147:1.4 | S: ending … | T: for the destruction …
an8.121-147:1.5 | S: vanishing … | T: for the vanishing …
an8.121-147:1.6 | S: fading away … | T: for the fading away …
an8.121-147:1.7 | S: cessation … | T: for the cessation …
an8.121-147:1.8 | S: giving away … | T: for the giving up …
an8.121-147:1.9 | S: letting go … | T: for the relinquishment of lust …
an8.121-147:1.10 | S: these eight things should be developed.” | T: these eight things are to be developed.”

## an8.13
an8.13:1.1 | S: “Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with eight factors is worthy of a king, fit to serve a king, and reckoned a factor of kingship. | T: “Bhikkhus, possessing eight factors, a king’s excellent thoroughbred horse is worthy of a king, an accessory of a king, and reckoned as a factor of kingship.
an8.13:1.2 | S: What eight? | T: What eight?
an8.13:1.3 | S: It’s when a fine royal thoroughbred is well born on both | T: “Here, (1) a king’s excellent thoroughbred horse is well born on both sides,
an8.13:1.4 | S: the mother’s and the father’s sides. | T: maternal and paternal;
an8.13:1.5 | S: He’s bred in the region fine thoroughbreds come from. | T: he is born in whatever area other excellent thoroughbred horses are born.
an8.13:1.6 | S: Whatever food he’s given, | T: (2) He respectfully eats whatever food they give him,
an8.13:1.7 | S: fresh or dry, | T: whether moist or dry,
an8.13:1.8 | S: he eats carefully, without making a mess. | T: without scattering it.
an8.13:1.9 | S: He’s disgusted by sitting or lying down in excrement or urine. | T: (3) He is repelled by sitting down or lying down near feces or urine.
an8.13:1.10 | S: He’s gentle and pleasant to live with, and he doesn’t upset the other horses. | T: (4) He is mild and pleasant to live with, and he does not agitate other horses.
an8.13:1.11 | S: He openly shows his tricks, bluffs, ruses, and feints to his trainer, | T: (5) He reveals his tricks, ploys, gambits, and wiles as they really are to his trainer
an8.13:1.12 | S: so the trainer can try to subdue them. | T: so that his trainer can make an effort to stamp them out of him.
an8.13:1.13 | S: He carries his load, determining: | T: (6) He carries loads, determined:
an8.13:1.14 | S: ‘Whether or not the other horses carry their loads, I’ll carry mine.’ | T: ‘Whether or not the other horses carry loads, I myself will carry them.’
an8.13:1.15 | S: He always walks in a straight path. | T: (7) When moving, he moves only along a straight path.
an8.13:1.16 | S: He’s strong, and stays strong even until death. | T: (8) He is strong, and he shows his strength right up until the end of his life.
an8.13:1.17 | S: A fine royal thoroughbred with these eight factors is worthy of a king. … | T: Possessing these eight factors, a king’s excellent thoroughbred horse is worthy of a king, an accessory of a king, and reckoned as a factor of kingship.
an8.13:2.1 | S: In the same way, a mendicant with eight qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with cupped palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world. | T: “So too, bhikkhus, possessing eight qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts … an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
an8.13:2.2 | S: What eight? | T: What eight?
an8.13:2.3 | S: It’s when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. | T: (1) “Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults. Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
an8.13:2.4 | S: Whatever food they’re given, | T: (2) He respectfully eats whatever food they give him,
an8.13:2.5 | S: coarse or fine, | T: whether coarse or excellent,
an8.13:2.6 | S: they eat carefully, without bother. | T: without being annoyed.
an8.13:2.7 | S: They’re disgusted with bad conduct by way of body, speech, or mind, | T: (3) He is repelled by bodily, verbal, and mental misconduct;
an8.13:2.8 | S: and by attainment of the many kinds of unskillful things. | T: he is repelled by the acquisition of the numerous kinds of bad unwholesome qualities.
an8.13:2.9 | S: They’re gentle and pleasant to live with, and they don’t upset the other mendicants. | T: (4) He is mild and pleasant to live with, and he does not agitate other bhikkhus.
an8.13:2.10 | S: They openly show their tricks, bluffs, ruses, and feints to their sensible spiritual companions, | T: (5) He reveals his tricks, ploys, gambits, and wiles as they really are to the Teacher or to his wise fellow monks
an8.13:2.11 | S: so they can try to subdue them. | T: so that they can make an effort to stamp them out of him.
an8.13:2.12 | S: They do their training, determining: | T: (6) He is one who takes up the training, determined:
an8.13:2.13 | S: ‘Whether or not the other mendicants do their training, I’ll do mine.’ | T: ‘Whether or not other bhikkhus train, I will train.’
an8.13:2.14 | S: They always walk in a straight path. | T: (7) When moving, he moves only along a straight path.
an8.13:2.15 | S: And here the straight path is | T: In this connection, this is the straight path:
an8.13:2.16 | S: right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. | T: right view … right concentration.
an8.13:2.17 | S: They’re energetic: | T: (8) He has aroused energy thus:
an8.13:2.18 | S: ‘Gladly, let my skin, sinews, and bones remain! Let the blood and flesh waste away in my body! I will not stop trying until I have achieved what is possible by human strength, energy, and vigor.’ | T: ‘Willingly, let only my skin, sinews, and bones remain, and let the flesh and blood dry up in my body, but I will not relax my energy so long as I have not attained what can be attained by manly strength, energy, and exertion.’
an8.13:2.19 | S: A mendicant with these eight qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with cupped palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.” | T: Possessing these eight qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts … an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.”
an8.13:2.20 | P: Tatiyaṁ. | T: (none)

## an8.19
an8.19:1.1 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying in Verañjā at the root of a neem tree dedicated to Naḷeru. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Verañjā at the foot of Naḷeru’s neem tree.
an8.19:1.2 | S: Then Pahārāda, lord of titans, went up to the Buddha, bowed, and stood to one side. The Buddha said to him, | T: Then Pahārāda, ruler of the asuras, approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, and stood to one side. The Blessed One then said to him:
an8.19:2.1 | S: “Well, Pahārāda, do the titans love the ocean?” | T: “Pahārāda, do the asuras take delight in the great ocean?”
an8.19:2.2 | S: “Sir, they do indeed.” | T: “Bhante, the asuras do take delight in the great ocean.”
an8.19:2.3 | S: “But seeing what incredible and amazing things do the titans love the ocean?” | T: “But, Pahārāda, how many astounding and amazing qualities do the asuras see in the great ocean because of which they take delight in it?”
an8.19:2.4 | S: “Sir, seeing eight incredible and amazing things the titans love the ocean. | T: “The asuras see eight astounding and amazing qualities in the great ocean because of which they take delight in it.
an8.19:2.5 | S: What eight? | T: What eight?
an8.19:2.6 | S: The ocean gradually slants, slopes, and inclines, with no abrupt precipice. | T: (1) “The great ocean, Bhante, slants, slopes, and inclines gradually, not dropping off abruptly.
an8.19:2.7 | P: Yampi, bhante, mahāsamuddo anupubbaninno anupubbapoṇo anupubbapabbhāro, na āyatakeneva papāto; | T: (none)
an8.19:2.8 | S: This is the first thing the titans love about the ocean. | T: This is the first astounding and amazing quality that the asuras see in the great ocean because of which they take delight in it.
an8.19:3.1 | S: Furthermore, the ocean is consistent and doesn’t overflow its boundaries. | T: (2) “Again, the great ocean is stable and does not overflow its boundaries.
an8.19:3.2 | P: Yampi, bhante, mahāsamuddo ṭhitadhammo velaṁ nātivattati; | T: (none)
an8.19:3.3 | S: This is the second thing the titans love about the ocean. | T: This is the second astounding and amazing quality that the asuras see in the great ocean….
an8.19:4.1 | S: Furthermore, the ocean doesn’t accommodate a carcass, but quickly carries it to the shore and strands it on the beach. | T: (3) “Again, the great ocean does not associate with a corpse, but quickly carries it to the coast and washes it ashore.
an8.19:4.2 | P: Yampi, bhante, mahāsamuddo na matena kuṇapena saṁvasati, yaṁ hoti mahāsamudde mataṁ kuṇapaṁ, taṁ khippameva tīraṁ vāheti, thalaṁ ussāreti; | T: (none)
an8.19:4.3 | S: This is the third thing the titans love about the ocean. | T: This is the third astounding and amazing quality that the asuras see in the great ocean….
an8.19:5.1 | S: Furthermore, when they reach the ocean, all the great rivers—that is, | T: (4) “Again, when the great rivers—
an8.19:5.2 | S: the Ganges, Yamunā, Aciravatī, Sarabhū, and Mahī—lose their names and clans and are simply reckoned as ‘the ocean’. | T: the Ganges, the Yamunā, the Aciravatī, the Sarabhū, and the Mahī—reach the great ocean, they give up their former names and designations and are simply called the great ocean.
an8.19:5.3 | P: Yampi, bhante, yā kāci mahānadiyo, seyyathidaṁ—gaṅgā yamunā aciravatī sarabhū mahī, tā mahāsamuddaṁ patvā jahanti purimāni nāmagottāni, ‘mahāsamuddo’ tveva saṅkhaṁ gacchanti; | T: (none)
an8.19:5.4 | S: This is the fourth thing the titans love about the ocean. | T: This is the fourth astounding and amazing quality that the asuras see in the great ocean….
an8.19:6.1 | S: Furthermore, for all the world’s streams that reach it, and the showers that fall from the sky, the ocean never empties or fills up. | T: (5) “Again, whatever streams in the world flow into the great ocean and however much rain falls into it from the sky, neither a decrease nor a filling up can be seen in the great ocean.
an8.19:6.2 | P: Yampi, bhante, yā ca loke savantiyo mahāsamuddaṁ appenti yā ca antalikkhā dhārā papatanti, na tena mahāsamuddassa ūnattaṁ vā pūrattaṁ vā paññāyati; | T: (none)
an8.19:6.3 | S: This is the fifth thing the titans love about the ocean. | T: This is the fifth astounding and amazing quality that the asuras see in the great ocean….
an8.19:7.1 | S: Furthermore, the ocean has just one taste, the taste of salt. | T: (6) “Again, the great ocean has but one taste, the taste of salt.
an8.19:7.2 | P: Yampi, bhante, mahāsamuddo ekaraso loṇaraso; | T: (none)
an8.19:7.3 | S: This is the sixth thing the titans love about the ocean. | T: This is the sixth astounding and amazing quality that the asuras see in the great ocean….
an8.19:8.1 | S: Furthermore, the ocean is full of many kinds of treasures, such as pearls, gems, beryl, conch, quartz, coral, silver, native gold, rubies, and emeralds. | T: (7) “Again, the great ocean contains many precious substances, numerous precious substances such as pearls, gems, lapis lazuli, conch, quartz, coral, silver, gold, rubies, and cats-eye.
an8.19:8.2 | P: Yampi, bhante, mahāsamuddo bahuratano anekaratano; tatrimāni ratanāni, seyyathidaṁ—muttā maṇi veḷuriyo saṅkho silā pavāḷaṁ rajataṁ jātarūpaṁ lohitako masāragallaṁ; | T: (none)
an8.19:8.3 | S: This is the seventh thing the titans love about the ocean. | T: This is the seventh astounding and amazing quality that the asuras see in the great ocean….
an8.19:9.1 | S: Furthermore, many great beings live in the ocean, such as leviathans, leviathan-gulpers, leviathan-gulper-gulpers, titans, dragons, and centaurs. In the ocean there are life-forms a hundred leagues long, or even two hundred, three hundred, four hundred, or five hundred leagues long. | T: (8) “Again, the great ocean is the abode of great beings such as timis, timiṅgalas, timirapiṅgalas, asuras, nāgas, and gandhabbas. There are in the great ocean beings with bodies one hundred yojanas long, two hundred, three hundred, four hundred, and five hundred yojanas long.
an8.19:9.2 | P: Yampi, bhante, mahāsamuddo mahataṁ bhūtānaṁ āvāso; tatrime bhūtā—timi timiṅgalo timirapiṅgalo asurā nāgā gandhabbā; santi mahāsamudde yojanasatikāpi attabhāvā …pe… tiyojana … catuyojana … pañcayojanasatikāpi attabhāvā; | T: (none)
an8.19:9.3 | S: This is the eighth thing the titans love about the ocean. | T: This is the eighth astounding and amazing quality that the asuras see in the great ocean because of which they take delight in it.
an8.19:9.4 | S: Seeing these eight incredible and amazing things the titans love the ocean. | T: “These, Bhante, are the eight astounding and amazing qualities that the asuras see in the great ocean because of which they take delight in it.
an8.19:10.1 | S: Well, sir, do the mendicants love this teaching and training?” | T: But do the bhikkhus take delight in this Dhamma and discipline?”
an8.19:10.2 | S: “They do indeed, Pahārāda.” | T: “Pahārāda, the bhikkhus do take delight in this Dhamma and discipline.”
an8.19:10.3 | S: “But seeing how many incredible and amazing things do the mendicants love this teaching and training?” | T: “But, Bhante, how many astounding and amazing qualities do the bhikkhus see in this Dhamma and discipline because of which they take delight in it?”
an8.19:10.4 | S: “Seeing eight incredible and amazing things, Pahārāda, the mendicants love this teaching and training. | T: “The bhikkhus see eight astounding and amazing qualities in this Dhamma and discipline because of which they take delight in it.
an8.19:10.5 | S: What eight? | T: What eight?
an8.19:10.6 | S: The ocean gradually slants, slopes, and inclines, with no abrupt precipice. | T: (1) “Just as, Pahārāda, the great ocean slants, slopes, and inclines gradually, not dropping off abruptly,
an8.19:10.7 | S: In the same way in this teaching and training the penetration to enlightenment comes from gradual training, progress, and practice, not abruptly. | T: so too, in this Dhamma and discipline penetration to final knowledge occurs by gradual training, gradual activity, and gradual practice, not abruptly.
an8.19:10.8 | P: Yampi, pahārāda, imasmiṁ dhammavinaye anupubbasikkhā anupubbakiriyā anupubbapaṭipadā, na āyatakeneva aññāpaṭivedho; | T: (none)
an8.19:10.9 | S: This is the first thing the mendicants love about this teaching and training. | T: This is the first astounding and amazing quality that the bhikkhus see in this Dhamma and discipline because of which they take delight in it.
an8.19:11.1 | S: The ocean is consistent and doesn’t overflow its boundaries. | T: (2) “Just as the great ocean is stable and does not overflow its boundaries,
an8.19:11.2 | S: In the same way, when a training rule is laid down for my disciples they wouldn’t break it even for the sake of their own life. | T: so too, when I have prescribed a training rule for my disciples, they will not transgress it even for life’s sake.
an8.19:11.3 | P: Yampi, pahārāda, mayā sāvakānaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ taṁ mama sāvakā jīvitahetupi nātikkamanti; | T: (none)
an8.19:11.4 | S: This is the second thing the mendicants love about this teaching and training. | T: This is the second astounding and amazing quality that the bhikkhus see in this Dhamma and discipline….
an8.19:12.1 | S: The ocean doesn’t accommodate a carcass, but quickly carries it to the shore and strands it on the beach. | T: (3) “Just as the great ocean does not associate with a corpse, but quickly carries it to the coast and washes it ashore,
an8.19:13.1 | S: In the same way, the Saṅgha doesn’t accommodate an individual who is unethical, of bad qualities, filthy, with suspicious behavior, underhand, no true ascetic or spiritual practitioner—though claiming to be one—rotten inside, festering, and depraved. But they quickly gather and expel them. Even if they are sitting in the middle of the Saṅgha, they’re far from the Saṅgha, and the Saṅgha is far from them. | T: so too, the Saṅgha does not associate with a person who is immoral, of bad character, impure, of suspect behavior, secretive in his actions, not an ascetic though claiming to be one, not a celibate though claiming to be one, inwardly rotten, corrupt, depraved; rather, it quickly assembles and expels him. Even though he is seated in the midst of the Saṅgha of bhikkhus, yet he is far from the Saṅgha and the Saṅgha is far from him.
an8.19:13.2 | P: Yampi, pahārāda, yo so puggalo dussīlo pāpadhammo asucisaṅkassarasamācāro paṭicchannakammanto assamaṇo samaṇapaṭiñño abrahmacārī brahmacāripaṭiñño antopūti avassuto kasambujāto, na tena saṅgho saṁvasati; khippameva naṁ sannipatitvā ukkhipati; kiñcāpi so hoti majjhe bhikkhusaṅghassa sannisinno, atha kho so ārakāva saṅghamhā saṅgho ca tena; | T: (none)
an8.19:13.3 | S: This is the third thing the mendicants love about this teaching and training. | T: This is the third astounding and amazing quality that the bhikkhus see in this Dhamma and discipline….
an8.19:14.1 | S: When they reach the ocean, all the great rivers—that is, the Ganges, Yamunā, Aciravatī, Sarabhū, and Mahī—lose their names and clans and are simply reckoned as ‘the ocean’. | T: (4) “Just as, when the great rivers … reach the great ocean, they give up their former names and designations and are simply called the great ocean,
an8.19:14.2 | S: In the same way, when they go forth from the lay life to homelessness, all four classes—aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, and menials—lose their former names and clans and are simply reckoned as ‘ascetics who follow the Sakyan’. | T: so too, when members of the four social classes—khattiyas, brahmins, vessas, and suddas—go forth from the household life into homelessness in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, they give up their former names and clans and are simply called ascetics following the Sakyan son.
an8.19:14.3 | P: Yampi, pahārāda, cattārome vaṇṇā—khattiyā, brāhmaṇā, vessā, suddā, te tathāgatappavedite dhammavinaye agārasmā anagāriyaṁ pabbajitvā jahanti purimāni nāmagottāni, ‘samaṇā sakyaputtiyā’ tveva saṅkhaṁ gacchanti; | T: (none)
an8.19:14.4 | S: This is the fourth thing the mendicants love about this teaching and training. | T: This is the fourth astounding and amazing quality that the bhikkhus see in this Dhamma and discipline….
an8.19:15.1 | S: For all the world’s streams that reach it, and the showers that fall from the sky, the ocean never empties or fills up. | T: (5) “Just as, whatever streams in the world flow into the great ocean and however much rain falls into it from the sky, neither a decrease nor a filling up can be seen in the great ocean,
an8.19:15.2 | S: In the same way, though several mendicants become fully extinguished in the element of extinguishment with no residue, the element of extinguishment never empties or fills up. | T: so too, even if many bhikkhus attain final nibbāna by way of the nibbāna element without residue remaining, neither a decrease nor a filling up can be seen in the nibbāna element.
an8.19:15.3 | P: Yampi, pahārāda, bahū cepi bhikkhū anupādisesāya nibbānadhātuyā parinibbāyanti, na tena nibbānadhātuyā ūnattaṁ vā pūrattaṁ vā paññāyati; | T: (none)
an8.19:15.4 | S: This is the fifth thing the mendicants love about this teaching and training. | T: This is the fifth astounding and amazing quality that the bhikkhus see in this Dhamma and discipline….
an8.19:16.1 | S: The ocean has just one taste, the taste of salt. | T: (6) “Just as the great ocean has but one taste, the taste of salt,
an8.19:16.2 | S: In the same way, this teaching and training has one taste, the taste of freedom. | T: so too, this Dhamma and discipline has but one taste, the taste of liberation.
an8.19:16.3 | P: Yampi, pahārāda, ayaṁ dhammavinayo ekaraso, vimuttiraso; | T: (none)
an8.19:16.4 | S: This is the sixth thing the mendicants love about this teaching and training. | T: This is the sixth astounding and amazing quality that the bhikkhus see in this Dhamma and discipline….
an8.19:17.1 | S: The ocean is full of many kinds of treasures, such as pearls, gems, beryl, conch, quartz, coral, silver, native gold, rubies, and emeralds. | T: (7) “Just as the great ocean contains many precious substances, numerous precious substances such as pearls … cats-eye,
an8.19:17.2 | S: In the same way, this teaching and training is full of many kinds of treasures, such as the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, the four right efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven awakening factors, and the noble eightfold path. | T: so too, this Dhamma and discipline contains many precious substances, numerous precious substances: the four establishments of mindfulness, the four right strivings, the four bases for psychic potency, the five spiritual faculties, the five powers, the seven factors of enlightenment, the noble eightfold path.
an8.19:17.3 | P: Yampi, pahārāda, ayaṁ dhammavinayo bahuratano anekaratano; tatrimāni ratanāni, seyyathidaṁ—cattāro satipaṭṭhānā, cattāro sammappadhānā, cattāro iddhipādā, pañcindriyāni, pañca balāni, satta bojjhaṅgā, ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo; | T: (none)
an8.19:17.4 | S: This is the seventh thing the mendicants love about this teaching and training. | T: This is the seventh astounding and amazing quality that the bhikkhus see in this Dhamma and discipline….
an8.19:18.1 | S: Many great beings live in the ocean, such as leviathans, leviathan-gulpers, leviathan-gulper-gulpers, titans, dragons, and centaurs. In the ocean there are life-forms a hundred leagues long, or even two hundred, three hundred, four hundred, or five hundred leagues long. | T: (8) “Just as the great ocean is the abode of great beings such as timis … … gandhabbas; and as there are in the great ocean beings with bodies one hundred yojanas long … five hundred yojanas long,
an8.19:18.2 | S: In the same way, great beings live in this teaching and training, and these are those beings. The stream-enterer and the one practicing to realize the fruit of stream-entry. The once-returner and the one practicing to realize the fruit of once-return. The non-returner and the one practicing to realize the fruit of non-return. The perfected one, and the one practicing for perfection. | T: so too this Dhamma and discipline is the abode of great beings: the stream-enterer, the one practicing for realization of the fruit of stream-entry; the once-returner, the one practicing for realization of the fruit of once-returning; the non-returner, the one practicing for realization of the fruit of non-returning; the arahant, the one practicing for arahantship.
an8.19:18.3 | P: Yampi, pahārāda, ayaṁ dhammavinayo mahataṁ bhūtānaṁ āvāso; tatrime bhūtā—sotāpanno sotāpattiphalasacchikiriyāya paṭipanno, sakadāgāmī sakadāgāmiphalasacchikiriyāya paṭipanno, anāgāmī anāgāmiphalasacchikiriyāya paṭipanno, arahā arahattāya paṭipanno; | T: (none)
an8.19:18.4 | S: This is the eighth thing the mendicants love about this teaching and training. | T: This is the eighth astounding and amazing quality that the bhikkhus see in this Dhamma and discipline because of which they take delight in it.
an8.19:19.1 | S: Seeing these eight incredible and amazing things, Pahārāda, the mendicants love this teaching and training.” | T: “These, Pahārāda, are the eight astounding and amazing qualities that the bhikkhus see in this Dhamma and discipline because of which they take delight in it.”
an8.19:19.2 | P: Navamaṁ. | T: (none)

## an8.1
an8.1:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
an8.1:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
an8.1:1.3 | S: There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, | T: There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus:
an8.1:1.4 | S: “Mendicants!” | T: “Bhikkhus!”
an8.1:1.5 | S: “Venerable sir,” they replied. | T: “Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
an8.1:1.6 | S: The Buddha said this: | T: The Blessed One said this:
an8.1:2.1 | S: “Mendicants, you can expect eight benefits when the heart’s release by love has been cultivated, developed, and practiced, made a vehicle and a basis, kept up, consolidated, and properly implemented. | T: “Bhikkhus, when the liberation of the mind by loving-kindness has been pursued, developed, and cultivated, made a vehicle and basis, carried out, consolidated, and properly undertaken, eight benefits are to be expected.
an8.1:2.2 | S: What eight? | T: What eight?
an8.1:2.3 | S: You sleep at ease. You wake happily. You don’t have bad dreams. Humans love you. Non-humans love you. Deities protect you. You can’t be harmed by fire, poison, or blade. If you don’t penetrate any higher, you’ll be reborn in a realm of divinity. | T: (1) “One sleeps well; (2) one awakens happily; (3) one does not have bad dreams; (4) one is pleasing to human beings; (5) one is pleasing to spirits; (6) deities protect one; (7) fire, poison, and weapons do not injure one; and (8) if one does not penetrate further, one moves on to the brahmā world.
an8.1:2.4 | S: You can expect these eight benefits when the heart’s release by love has been cultivated, developed, and practiced, made a vehicle and a basis, kept up, consolidated, and properly implemented. | T: “When, bhikkhus, the liberation of the mind by loving-kindness has been pursued, developed, and cultivated, made a vehicle and basis, carried out, consolidated, and properly undertaken, these eight benefits are to be expected.”
an8.1:3.1 | S: A mindful one who develops | T: For one who, ever mindful, develops
an8.1:3.2 | S: limitless love | T: measureless loving-kindness,
an8.1:3.3 | S: weakens the fetters, | T: the fetters thin out as he sees
an8.1:3.4 | S: seeing the ending of attachments. | T: the destruction of the acquisitions.
an8.1:4.1 | S: Loving just one creature with a hateless heart | T: If, with a mind free from hate, one arouses love toward just one being,
an8.1:4.2 | S: makes you a true person. | T: one thereby becomes good.
an8.1:4.3 | S: Sympathetic for all creatures, | T: Compassionate in mind toward all beings,
an8.1:4.4 | S: a noble one creates abundant merit. | T: the noble one generates abundant merit.
an8.1:5.1 | S: The royal potentates conquered this land | T: Those royal sages who conquered the earth with its multitudes of beings
an8.1:5.2 | S: and traveled around sponsoring sacrifices— | T: traveled around performing sacrifices:
an8.1:5.3 | S: horse sacrifice, human sacrifice, | T: the horse sacrifice, the person sacrifice,
an8.1:5.4 | S: the sacrifices of the ‘casting of the yoke-pin’, <j>the ‘royal soma drinking’, and the ‘unimpeded’. | T: sammāpāsa, vājapeyya, niraggaḷa.
an8.1:6.1 | S: These are not worth a sixteenth part | T: All these are not worth a sixteenth part
an8.1:6.2 | S: of the mind developed with love, | T: of a well-developed loving mind,
an8.1:6.3 | S: as all the constellations of stars | T: just as the hosts of stars cannot match
an8.1:6.4 | S: aren’t worth a sixteenth part of the moon’s light. | T: a sixteenth part of the moon’s radiance.
an8.1:7.1 | S: Don’t kill or cause others to kill, | T: One who does not kill or enjoin killing,
an8.1:7.2 | S: don’t conquer or encourage others to conquer, | T: who does not conquer or enjoin conquest,
an8.1:7.3 | S: with love for all sentient beings, | T: one who has loving-kindness toward all beings
an8.1:7.4 | S: you’ll have no enmity for anyone.” | T: harbors no enmity toward anyone.
an8.1:7.5 | P: Paṭhamaṁ. | T: (none)

