## mn65, continued
mn65:19.2 | S: With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds: ‘These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. … they’re reborn in the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. … they’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’ And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman … they understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. | T: §25…Thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, he understands how beings pass on according to their actions.
mn65:19.3 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn65:19.4 | S: Because that’s what happens when someone fulfills the training according to the Teacher’s instructions. | T: That is how it is with one who fulfils the training in the Teacher’s Dispensation.
mn65:20.1 | S: When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward knowledge of the ending of defilements. | T: “When his concentrated mind is thus purified and bright…attained to imperturbability, he directs it to knowledge of the destruction of the taints.
mn65:20.2 | S: They truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. | T: He understands as it actually is: ‘This is suffering’…as MN51,
mn65:20.3 | S: They truly understand: ‘These are defilements’ … ‘This is the origin of defilements’ … ‘This is the cessation of defilements’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements’. | T: §26…He understands as it actually is: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of the taints.’
mn65:21.1 | S: Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. | T: “When he knows and sees thus, his mind is liberated from the taint of sensual desire, from the taint of being, and from the taint of ignorance.
mn65:21.2 | S: When they’re freed, they know they’re freed. | T: When it is liberated there comes the knowledge: ‘It is liberated.’
mn65:21.3 | S: They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’ | T: He understands: ‘Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.’
mn65:21.4 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn65:21.5 | S: Because that’s what happens when someone fulfills the training according to the Teacher’s instructions.” | T: That is how it is with one who fulfils the training in the Teacher’s Dispensation.”
mn65:22.1 | S: When he said this, Venerable Bhaddāli said to the Buddha, | T: Thereupon the venerable Bhaddāli asked:
mn65:22.2 | S: “What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why they punish some monk, repeatedly pressuring him? | T: “Venerable sir, what is the cause, what is the reason, why they take action against some bhikkhu here by repeatedly admonishing him?
mn65:22.3 | S: And what is the cause, what is the reason why they don’t similarly punish another monk, repeatedly pressuring him?” | T: What is the cause, what is the reason, why they do not take such action against some bhikkhu here by repeatedly admonishing him?”
mn65:23.1 | S: “Take a monk who is a frequent offender with many offenses. | T: “Here, Bhaddāli, some bhikkhu is a constant offender with many offences.
mn65:23.2 | S: When admonished by the monks, he dodges the issue, distracting the discussion with irrelevant points. He displays annoyance, hate, and bitterness. He doesn’t proceed properly, he doesn’t fall in line, he doesn’t proceed to get past it, and he doesn’t say: ‘I’ll do what pleases the Saṅgha.’ | T: When he is corrected by the bhikkhus, he prevaricates, leads the talk aside, shows disturbance, hate, and bitterness; he does not proceed rightly, he does not comply, he does not clear himself, he does not say: ‘Let me so act that the Sangha will be satisfied.’
mn65:23.3 | S: In such a case, the monks say: | T: Bhikkhus, taking account of this matter, think:
mn65:23.4 | S: ‘Reverends, this monk is a frequent offender, with many offenses. | T: (none)
mn65:23.5 | S: When admonished by the monks, he dodges the issue, distracting the discussion with irrelevant points. He displays annoyance, hate, and bitterness. He doesn’t proceed properly, he doesn’t fall in line, he doesn’t proceed to get past it, and he doesn’t say: “I’ll do what pleases the Saṅgha.” | T: (none)
mn65:23.6 | S: It’d be good for the venerables to examine this monk in such a way that this disciplinary issue is not quickly settled.’ | T: ‘It would be good if the venerable ones examine this bhikkhu in such a way that this litigation against him is not settled too quickly.’
mn65:23.7 | S: And that’s what they do. | T: And the bhikkhus examine that bhikkhu in such a way that the litigation against him is not settled too quickly.
mn65:24.1 | S: Take some other monk who is a frequent offender with many offenses. | T: “But here some bhikkhu is a constant offender with many offences.
mn65:24.2 | S: When admonished by the monks, he doesn’t dodge the issue, distracting the discussion with irrelevant points. He doesn’t display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. He proceeds properly, he falls in line, he proceeds to get past it, and he says: ‘I’ll do what pleases the Saṅgha.’ | T: When he is corrected by the bhikkhus, he does not prevaricate, lead the talk aside, or show disturbance, hate, and bitterness; he proceeds rightly, he complies, he clears himself, he says: ‘Let me so act that the Sangha will be satisfied.’
mn65:24.3 | S: In such a case, the monks say: | T: Bhikkhus, taking account of this matter, think:
mn65:24.4 | S: ‘Reverends, this monk is a frequent offender, with many offenses. | T: (none)
mn65:24.5 | S: When admonished by the monks, he doesn’t dodge the issue, distracting the discussion with irrelevant points. He doesn’t display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. He proceeds properly, he falls in line, he proceeds to get past it, and he says: “I’ll do what pleases the Saṅgha.” | T: (none)
mn65:24.6 | S: It’d be good for the venerables to examine this monk in such a way that this disciplinary issue is quickly settled.’ | T: ‘It would be good if the venerable ones examine this bhikkhu in such a way that this litigation against him is settled quickly.’
mn65:24.7 | S: And that’s what they do. | T: And the bhikkhus examine that bhikkhu in such a way that the litigation against him is settled quickly.
mn65:25.1 | S: Take some other monk who is an occasional offender without many offenses. | T: “Here some bhikkhu is a chance offender without many offences.
mn65:25.2 | S: When admonished by the monks, he dodges the issue … | T: When he is corrected by the bhikkhus, he prevaricates…
mn65:25.3 | S: In such a case, the monks say: | T: (none)
mn65:25.4 | S: ‘Reverends, this monk is an occasional offender without many offenses. | T: (none)
mn65:25.5 | S: When admonished by the monks, he dodges the issue … | T: (none)
mn65:25.6 | S: It’d be good for the venerables to examine this monk in such a way that this disciplinary issue is not quickly settled.’ | T: repeat rest of §23…
mn65:25.7 | S: And that’s what they do. | T: And the bhikkhus examine that bhikkhu in such a way that the litigation against him is not settled too quickly.
mn65:26.1 | S: Take some other monk who is an occasional offender without many offenses. | T: “But here some bhikkhu is a chance offender without many offences.
mn65:26.2 | S: When admonished by the monks, he doesn’t dodge the issue … | T: When he is corrected by the bhikkhus, he does not prevaricate…
mn65:26.3 | S: In such a case, the monks say: | T: (none)
mn65:26.4 | S: ‘Reverends, this monk is an occasional offender without many offenses. | T: (none)
mn65:26.5 | S: When admonished by the monks, he doesn’t dodge the issue … | T: (none)
mn65:26.6 | S: It’d be good for the venerables to examine this monk in such a way that this disciplinary issue is quickly settled.’ | T: repeat rest of §24…
mn65:26.7 | S: And that’s what they do. | T: And the bhikkhus examine that bhikkhu in such a way that the litigation against him is settled quickly.
mn65:27.1 | S: Take some other monk who gets by with mere faith and fondness. | T: “Here some bhikkhu progresses by a measure of faith and love.
mn65:27.2 | S: In such a case, the monks say: | T: In this case bhikkhus consider thus:
mn65:27.3 | S: ‘Reverends, this monk gets by with mere faith and fondness. | T: ‘Friends, this bhikkhu progresses by a measure of faith and love.
mn65:27.4 | S: Suppose we punish him, repeatedly pressuring him— | T: (none)
mn65:27.5 | S: no, let him not lose what little faith and fondness he has!’ | T: Let him not lose that measure of faith and love, as he may if we take action against him by repeatedly admonishing him.’
mn65:28.1 | S: Suppose there was a person with one eye. Their friends and colleagues, relatives and kin would protect that one eye: | T: Suppose a man had only one eye; then his friends and companions, his kinsmen and relatives, would guard his eye, thinking:
mn65:28.2 | S: ‘Let them not lose the one eye that they have!’ | T: ‘Let him not lose his one eye.’
mn65:28.3 | S: In the same way, some monk gets by with mere faith and fondness. | T: So too, some bhikkhu progresses by a measure of faith and love…
mn65:28.4 | S: In such a case, the monks say: | T: (none)
mn65:28.5 | S: ‘Reverends, this monk gets by with mere faith and fondness. | T: (none)
mn65:28.6 | S: Suppose we punish him, repeatedly pressuring him— | T: (none)
mn65:28.7 | S: no, let him not lose what little faith and love he has!’ | T: ‘Let him not lose that measure of faith and love, as he may if we take action against him by repeatedly admonishing him.’
mn65:28.8 | S: This is the cause, this is the reason why they punish some monk, repeatedly pressuring him. | T: “This is the cause, this is the reason, why they take action against some bhikkhu here by repeatedly admonishing him;
mn65:28.9 | S: And this is the cause, this is the reason why they don’t similarly punish another monk, repeatedly pressuring him.” | T: this is the cause, this is the reason, why they do not take such action against some bhikkhu here by repeatedly admonishing him.”
mn65:29.1 | S: “What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why there used to be fewer training rules but more enlightened mendicants? | T: “Venerable sir, what is the cause, what is the reason, why there were previously fewer training rules and more bhikkhus became established in final knowledge?
mn65:29.2 | S: And what is the cause, what is the reason why these days there are more training rules and fewer enlightened mendicants?” | T: What is the cause, what is the reason, why there are now more training rules and fewer bhikkhus become established in final knowledge?”
mn65:30.1 | S: “That’s how it is, Bhaddāli. When sentient beings are in decline and the true teaching is disappearing there are more training rules and fewer enlightened mendicants. | T: “That is how it is, Bhaddāli. When beings are deteriorating and the true Dhamma is disappearing, then there are more training rules and fewer bhikkhus become established in final knowledge.
mn65:30.2 | S: The Teacher does not lay down training rules for disciples as long as certain defiling influences have not appeared in the Saṅgha. | T: The Teacher does not make known the training rule for disciples until certain things that are the basis for taints become manifest here in the Sangha;
mn65:30.3 | S: But when such defiling influences appear in the Saṅgha, the Teacher lays down training rules for disciples to protect against them. | T: but when certain things that are the basis for taints become manifest here in the Sangha, then the Teacher makes known the training rule for disciples in order to ward off those things that are the basis for taints.
mn65:31.1 | S: And they don’t appear until the Saṅgha has attained a great size, | T: “Those things that are the basis for taints do not become manifest here in the Sangha until the Sangha has reached greatness;
mn65:31.2 | P: Yato ca kho, bhaddāli, saṅgho mahattaṁ patto hoti, atha idhekacce āsavaṭṭhānīyā dhammā saṅghe pātubhavanti. | T: but when the Sangha has reached greatness, then those things that are the basis for taints become manifest here in the Sangha,
mn65:31.3 | P: Atha satthā sāvakānaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññāpeti tesaṁyeva āsavaṭṭhānīyānaṁ dhammānaṁ paṭighātāya. | T: and then the Teacher makes known the training rule for disciples in order to ward off those things that are the basis for taints.
mn65:31.4 | S: an abundance of material support and fame, learning, and seniority. | T: Those things that are the basis for taints do not become manifest here in the Sangha until the Sangha has reached the acme of worldly gain…the acme of fame…great learning…long-standing renown;
mn65:31.5 | S: But when the Saṅgha has attained these things, then such defiling influences appear in the Saṅgha, and the Teacher lays down training rules for disciples to protect against them. | T: but when the Sangha has reached long-standing renown, then those things that are the basis for taints become manifest here in the Sangha, and then the Teacher makes known the training rule for disciples in order to ward off those things that are the basis for taints.
mn65:32.1 | S: There were only a few of you there at the time when I taught the exposition on the simile of the thoroughbred colt. | T: “There were few of you, Bhaddāli, when I taught an exposition of the Dhamma through the simile of the young thoroughbred colt.
mn65:32.2 | S: Do you remember that, Bhaddāli?” | T: Do you remember that, Bhaddāli?”
mn65:32.3 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “No, venerable sir.”
mn65:32.4 | S: “What do you believe the reason for that is?” | T: “To what reason do you attribute that?”
mn65:32.5 | S: “Sir, it’s surely because for a long time now I haven’t fulfilled the training according to the Teacher’s instructions.” | T: “Venerable sir, I have long been one who did not fulfil the training in the Teacher’s Dispensation.”
mn65:32.6 | S: “That’s not the only reason, Bhaddāli. | T: “That is not the only cause or the only reason.
mn65:32.7 | S: Rather, for a long time I have encompassed your mind and known: | T: But rather, by encompassing your mind with my mind, I have long known you thus:
mn65:32.8 | S: ‘While I’m teaching, this futile man doesn’t pay attention, apply the mind, concentrate wholeheartedly, or actively listen to the teaching.’ | T: ‘When I am teaching the Dhamma, this misguided man does not heed it, does not give it attention, does not engage it with all his mind, does not hear the Dhamma with eager ears.’
mn65:32.9 | S: Still, Bhaddāli, I shall teach the exposition on the simile of the thoroughbred colt. | T: Still, Bhaddāli, I will teach you an exposition of the Dhamma through the simile of the young thoroughbred colt.
mn65:32.10 | S: Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.” | T: Listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”
mn65:32.11 | S: “Yes, sir,” Bhaddāli replied. | T: “Yes, venerable sir,” the venerable Bhaddāli replied.
mn65:32.12 | S: The Buddha said this: | T: The Blessed One said this:
mn65:33.1 | S: “Suppose a deft horse trainer were to obtain a fine thoroughbred. First of all he’d make it get used to wearing the bit. | T: “Bhaddāli, suppose a clever horse-trainer obtains a fine thoroughbred colt. He first makes him get used to wearing the bit.
mn65:33.2 | S: Because it has not done this before, it still resorts to some twists, ducks, and dodges. | T: While the colt is being made to get used to wearing the bit, because he is doing something that he has never done before, he displays some contortion, writhing, and vacillation,
mn65:33.3 | S: But with regular and gradual practice its bad behavior is extinguished. | T: but through constant repetition and gradual practice, he becomes peaceful in that action.
mn65:33.4 | S: When it has done this, the horse trainer next makes it get used to wearing the harness. | T: “When the colt has become peaceful in that action, the horse-trainer further makes him get used to wearing the harness.
mn65:33.5 | S: Because it has not done this before, it still resorts to some twists, ducks, and dodges. | T: While the colt is being made to get used to wearing the harness, because he is doing something that he has never done before, he displays some contortion, writhing, and vacillation,
mn65:33.6 | S: But with regular and gradual practice its bad behavior is extinguished. | T: but through constant repetition and gradual practice, he becomes peaceful in that action.
mn65:33.7 | S: When it has done this, the horse trainer next makes it get used to walking in procession, circling, prancing, galloping, charging, the protocols and customs of court, and in the very best speed, fleetness, and camaraderie. | T: “When the colt has become peaceful in that action, the horse-trainer further makes him act in keeping in step, in running in a circle, in prancing, in galloping, in charging, in the kingly qualities, in the kingly heritage, in the highest speed, in the highest fleetness, in the highest gentleness.
mn65:33.8 | S: Because it has not done this before, it still resorts to some twists, ducks, and dodges. | T: While the colt is being made to get used to doing these things, because he is doing something that he has never done before, he displays some contortion, writhing, and vacillation,
mn65:33.9 | S: But with regular and gradual practice its bad behavior is extinguished. | T: but through constant repetition and gradual practice, he becomes peaceful in those actions.
mn65:33.10 | S: When it has done this, the horse trainer next rewards it with a grooming and a rub down. | T: “When the colt has become peaceful in these actions, the horse-trainer further rewards him with a rubbing down and a grooming.
mn65:33.11 | S: A fine royal thoroughbred with these ten factors is worthy of a king, fit to serve a king, and reckoned as a factor of kingship. | T: When a fine thoroughbred colt possesses these ten factors, he is worthy of the king, in the king’s service, and considered one of the factors of a king.
mn65:34.1 | S: In the same way, a mendicant with ten qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with cupped palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world. | T: “So too, Bhaddāli, when a bhikkhu possesses ten qualities, he is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
mn65:34.2 | S: What ten? | T: What are the ten?
mn65:34.3 | S: It’s when a mendicant has an adept’s right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. | T: Here, Bhaddāli, a bhikkhu possesses the right view of one beyond training, the right intention of one beyond training, the right speech of one beyond training, the right action of one beyond training, the right livelihood of one beyond training, the right effort of one beyond training, the right mindfulness of one beyond training, the right concentration of one beyond training, the right knowledge of one beyond training, and the right deliverance of one beyond training.
mn65:34.4 | S: A mendicant with these ten qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with cupped palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.” | T: When a bhikkhu possesses these ten qualities, he is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.”
mn65:34.5 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: That is what the Blessed One said.
mn65:34.6 | S: Satisfied, Venerable Bhaddāli approved what the Buddha said. | T: The venerable Bhaddāli was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
mn65:34.7 | P: Bhaddālisuttaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ pañcamaṁ. | T: (none)

## mn13
mn13:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
mn13:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. | T: On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
mn13:2.1 | S: Then several mendicants robed up in the morning and, taking their bowls and robes, entered Sāvatthī for alms. | T: Then, when it was morning, a number of bhikkhus dressed, and taking their bowls and outer robes, went into Sāvatthī for alms.
mn13:2.2 | S: Then it occurred to them, | T: Then they thought:
mn13:2.3 | S: “It’s too early to wander for alms in Sāvatthī. | T: “It is still too early to wander for alms in Sāvatthī.
mn13:2.4 | S: Why don’t we visit the monastery for the wanderers of other religions?” | T: Suppose we went to the park of the wanderers of other sects.”
mn13:2.5 | S: Then they went to the monastery for the wanderers of other religions and exchanged greetings with the wanderers there. | T: So they went to the park of the wanderers of other sects and exchanged greetings with the wanderers.
mn13:2.6 | S: When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side. The wanderers said to them: | T: When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, they sat down at one side. The wanderers said to them:
mn13:3.1 | S: “Reverends, the ascetic Gotama advocates the complete understanding of sensual pleasures, and so do we. | T: “Friends, the recluse Gotama describes the full understanding of sensual pleasures, and we do so too;
mn13:3.2 | S: The ascetic Gotama advocates the complete understanding of forms, and so do we. | T: the recluse Gotama describes the full understanding of material form, and we do so too;
mn13:3.3 | S: The ascetic Gotama advocates the complete understanding of feelings, and so do we. | T: the recluse Gotama describes the full understanding of feelings, and we do so too.
mn13:3.4 | S: What, then, is the difference between the ascetic Gotama’s teaching and instruction and ours?” | T: What then is the distinction here, friends, what is the variance, what is the difference between the recluse Gotama’s teaching of the Dhamma and ours, between his instructions and ours?”
mn13:3.5 | P: yadidaṁ dhammadesanāya vā dhammadesanaṁ, anusāsaniyā vā anusāsanin”ti? | T: (none)
mn13:4.1 | S: Those mendicants neither approved nor rejected that statement of the wanderers of other religions. | T: Then those bhikkhus neither approved nor disapproved of the wanderers’ words.
mn13:4.2 | S: They rose from their seats, thinking, | T: Without doing either they rose from their seats and went away, thinking:
mn13:4.3 | S: “We will learn the meaning of this statement from the Buddha himself.” | T: “We shall come to understand the meaning of these words in the Blessed One’s presence.”
mn13:5.1 | S: Then, after the meal, when they returned from almsround, they went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. The Buddha said: | T: When they had wandered for alms in Sāvatthī and had returned from their almsround, after the meal they went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, they sat down at one side and told him what had taken place. The Blessed One said:
mn13:5.2 | P: “idha mayaṁ, bhante, pubbaṇhasamayaṁ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya sāvatthiṁ piṇḍāya pāvisimha. | T: (none)
mn13:5.3 | P: Tesaṁ no, bhante, amhākaṁ etadahosi: | T: (none)
mn13:5.4 | P: ‘atippago kho tāva sāvatthiyaṁ piṇḍāya carituṁ, | T: (none)
mn13:5.5 | P: yaṁ nūna mayaṁ yena aññatitthiyānaṁ paribbājakānaṁ ārāmo tenupasaṅkameyyāmā’ti. | T: (none)
mn13:5.6 | P: Atha kho mayaṁ, bhante, yena aññatitthiyānaṁ paribbājakānaṁ ārāmo tenupasaṅkamimha; upasaṅkamitvā tehi aññatitthiyehi paribbājakehi saddhiṁ sammodimha; | T: (none)
mn13:5.7 | P: sammodanīyaṁ kathaṁ sāraṇīyaṁ vītisāretvā ekamantaṁ nisīdimha. Ekamantaṁ nisinne kho amhe, bhante, te aññatitthiyā paribbājakā etadavocuṁ: | T: (none)
mn13:5.8 | P: ‘samaṇo, āvuso, gotamo kāmānaṁ pariññaṁ paññapeti, mayampi kāmānaṁ pariññaṁ paññapema. | T: (none)
mn13:5.9 | P: Samaṇo, āvuso, gotamo rūpānaṁ pariññaṁ paññapeti, mayampi rūpānaṁ pariññaṁ paññapema. | T: (none)
mn13:5.10 | P: Samaṇo, āvuso, gotamo vedanānaṁ pariññaṁ paññapeti, mayampi vedanānaṁ pariññaṁ paññapema. | T: (none)
mn13:5.11 | P: Idha no, āvuso, ko viseso, ko adhippayāso, kiṁ nānākaraṇaṁ samaṇassa vā gotamassa amhākaṁ vā, yadidaṁ dhammadesanāya vā dhammadesanaṁ anusāsaniyā vā anusāsanin’ti. | T: (none)
mn13:5.12 | P: Atha kho mayaṁ, bhante, tesaṁ aññatitthiyānaṁ paribbājakānaṁ bhāsitaṁ neva abhinandimha, nappaṭikkosimha; | T: (none)
mn13:5.13 | P: anabhinanditvā appaṭikkositvā uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkamimha: | T: (none)
mn13:5.14 | P: ‘bhagavato santike etassa bhāsitassa atthaṁ ājānissāmā’”ti. | T: (none)
mn13:6.1 | S: “Mendicants, when wanderers of other religions say this, you should say to them: | T: “Bhikkhus, wanderers of other sects who speak thus should be questioned thus:
mn13:6.2 | S: ‘But reverends, what’s the gratification, the drawback, and the escape when it comes to sensual pleasures? | T: ‘But, friends, what is the gratification, what is the danger, and what is the escape in the case of sensual pleasures?
mn13:6.3 | S: What’s the gratification, the drawback, and the escape when it comes to forms? | T: What is the gratification, what is the danger, and what is the escape in the case of material form?
mn13:6.4 | S: What’s the gratification, the drawback, and the escape when it comes to feelings?’ | T: What is the gratification, what is the danger, and what is the escape in the case of feelings?’
mn13:6.5 | S: Questioned like this, the wanderers of other religions would be stumped, and, in addition, would get frustrated. | T: Being questioned thus, wanderers of other sects will fail to account for the matter, and what is more, they will get into difficulties.
mn13:6.6 | S: Why is that? | T: Why is that?
mn13:6.7 | S: Because they’re out of their element. | T: Because it is not their province.
mn13:6.8 | S: I don’t see anyone in this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans—who could provide a satisfying answer to these questions except the Realized One or his disciple or someone who has heard it from them. | T: Bhikkhus, I see no one in the world with its gods, its Māras, and its Brahmās, in this generation with its recluses and brahmins, with its princes and its people, who could satisfy the mind with a reply to these questions, except for the Tathāgata or his disciple or one who has learned it from them.
mn13:7.1 | S: And what is the gratification of sensual pleasures? | T: Sensual Pleasures i “And what, bhikkhus, is the gratification in the case of sensual pleasures?
mn13:7.2 | S: There are these five kinds of sensual stimulation. | T: Bhikkhus, there are these five cords of sensual pleasure.
mn13:7.3 | S: What five? | T: What are the five?
mn13:7.4 | S: Sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. | T: Forms cognizable by the eye that are wished for, desired, agreeable and likeable, connected with sensual desire, and provocative of lust.
mn13:7.5 | S: Sounds known by the ear … | T: Sounds cognizable by the ear…
mn13:7.6 | S: Smells known by the nose … | T: Odours cognizable by the nose…
mn13:7.7 | S: Tastes known by the tongue … | T: Flavours cognizable by the tongue…
mn13:7.8 | S: Touches known by the body, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. | T: Tangibles cognizable by the body that are wished for, desired, agreeable and likeable, connected with sensual desire, and provocative of lust.
mn13:7.9 | S: These are the five kinds of sensual stimulation. | T: These are the five cords of sensual pleasure.
mn13:7.10 | S: The pleasure and happiness that arise from these five kinds of sensual stimulation: this is the gratification of sensual pleasures. | T: Now the pleasure and joy that arise dependent on these five cords of sensual pleasure are the gratification in the case of sensual pleasures.
mn13:8.1 | S: And what is the drawback of sensual pleasures? | T: ii “And what, bhikkhus, is the danger in the case of sensual pleasures?
mn13:8.2 | S: It’s when a gentleman earns a living by means such as | T: Here, bhikkhus, on account of the craft by which a clansman makes a living—
mn13:8.3 | S: arithmetic, accounting, calculating, farming, trade, raising cattle, archery, government service, or one of the professions. | T: whether checking or accounting or calculating or farming or trading or husbandry or archery or the royal service, or whatever craft it may be—
mn13:8.4 | S: But they must face cold and heat, being hurt by the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles, and risking death from hunger and thirst. | T: he has to face cold, he has to face heat, he is injured by contact with gadflies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and creeping things; he risks death by hunger and thirst.
mn13:8.5 | S: This is a drawback of sensual pleasures apparent in the present life, a mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures. | T: Now this is a danger in the case of sensual pleasures, a mass of suffering visible here and now, having sensual pleasures as its cause, sensual pleasures as its source, sensual pleasures as its basis, the cause being simply sensual pleasures.
mn13:9.1 | S: That gentleman might try hard, strive, and make an effort, but fail to accrue riches. | T: “If no property comes to the clansman while he works and strives and makes an effort thus,
mn13:9.2 | S: If this happens, they sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion, saying: | T: he sorrows, grieves, and laments, he weeps beating his breast and becomes distraught, crying:
mn13:9.3 | S: ‘Oh, my hard work is wasted. My efforts are fruitless!’ | T: ‘My work is in vain, my effort is fruitless!’
mn13:9.4 | S: This too is a drawback of sensual pleasures apparent in the present life, a mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures. | T: Now this too is a danger in the case of sensual pleasures, a mass of suffering visible here and now…the cause being simply sensual pleasures.
mn13:10.1 | S: That gentleman might try hard, strive, and make an effort, and succeed in accruing riches. | T: “If property comes to the clansman while he works and strives and makes an effort thus,
mn13:10.2 | S: But they experience pain and sadness when they try to protect it, thinking: | T: he experiences pain and grief in protecting it:
mn13:10.3 | S: ‘How can I prevent my wealth from being taken by rulers or bandits, consumed by fire, swept away by flood, or taken by unloved heirs?’ | T: ‘How shall neither kings nor thieves make off with my property, nor fire burn it, nor water sweep it away, nor hateful heirs make off with it?’
mn13:10.4 | S: And even though they protect it and ward it, rulers or bandits take it, or fire consumes it, or flood sweeps it away, or unloved heirs take it. | T: And as he guards and protects his property, kings or thieves make off with it, or fire burns it, or water sweeps it away, or hateful heirs make off with it.
mn13:10.5 | S: They sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion: | T: And he sorrows, grieves, and laments, he weeps beating his breast and becomes distraught, crying:
mn13:10.6 | S: ‘What once was mine is gone.’ | T: ‘What I had I have no longer!’
mn13:10.7 | S: This too is a drawback of sensual pleasures apparent in the present life, a mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures. | T: Now this too is a danger in the case of sensual pleasures, a mass of suffering visible here and now…the cause being simply sensual pleasures.
mn13:11.1 | S: Furthermore, for the sake of sensual pleasures kings fight with kings, aristocrats fight with aristocrats, brahmins fight with brahmins, and householders fight with householders. A mother fights with her child, child with mother, father with child, and child with father. Brother fights with brother, brother with sister, sister with brother, and friend fights with friend. | T: “Again, with sensual pleasures as the cause, sensual pleasures as the source, sensual pleasures as the basis, the cause being simply sensual pleasures, kings quarrel with kings, nobles with nobles, brahmins with brahmins, householders with householders; mother quarrels with son, son with mother, father with son, son with father; brother quarrels with brother, brother with sister, sister with brother, friend with friend.
mn13:11.2 | S: Once they’ve started quarreling, arguing, and disputing, they attack each other with fists, stones, rods, and swords, | T: And here in their quarrels, brawls, and disputes they attack each other with fists, clods, sticks, or knives,
mn13:11.3 | S: resulting in death and deadly pain. | T: whereby they incur death or deadly suffering.
mn13:11.4 | S: This too is a drawback of sensual pleasures apparent in the present life, a mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures. | T: Now this too is a danger in the case of sensual pleasures, a mass of suffering here and now…the cause being simply sensual pleasures.
mn13:12.1 | S: Furthermore, for the sake of sensual pleasures they don their sword and shield, fasten their bow and arrows, and plunge into a battle massed on both sides, with arrows and spears flying and swords flashing. | T: “Again, with sensual pleasures as the cause…men take swords and shields and buckle on bows and quivers, and they charge into battle massed in double array with arrows and spears flying and swords flashing;
mn13:12.2 | S: There they are struck with arrows and spears, and their heads are chopped off, | T: and there they are wounded by arrows and spears, and their heads are cut off by swords,
mn13:12.3 | S: resulting in death and deadly pain. | T: whereby they incur death or deadly suffering.
mn13:12.4 | S: This too is a drawback of sensual pleasures apparent in the present life, a mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures. | T: Now this too is a danger in the case of sensual pleasures, a mass of suffering here and now…the cause being simply sensual pleasures.
mn13:13.1 | S: Furthermore, for the sake of sensual pleasures they don their sword and shield, fasten their bow and arrows, and charge wetly plastered bastions, with arrows and spears flying and swords flashing. | T: “Again, with sensual pleasures as the cause…men take swords and shields and buckle on bows and quivers, and they charge slippery bastions, with arrows and spears flying and swords flashing;
mn13:13.2 | S: There they are struck with arrows and spears, splashed with dung, crushed by a superior force, and their heads are chopped off, | T: and there they are wounded by arrows and spears and splashed with boiling liquids and crushed under heavy weights, and their heads are cut off by swords,
mn13:13.3 | S: resulting in death and deadly pain. | T: whereby they incur death or deadly suffering.
mn13:13.4 | S: This too is a drawback of sensual pleasures apparent in the present life, a mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures. | T: Now this too is a danger in the case of sensual pleasures, a mass of suffering here and now…the cause being simply sensual pleasures.
mn13:14.1 | S: Furthermore, for the sake of sensual pleasures they break into houses, plunder wealth, steal from isolated buildings, commit highway robbery, and commit adultery. | T: “Again, with sensual pleasures as the cause…men break into houses, plunder wealth, commit burglary, ambush highways, seduce others’ wives,
mn13:14.2 | S: The rulers would arrest them and subject them to various punishments— | T: and when they are caught, kings have many kinds of torture inflicted on them.
mn13:14.3 | S: whipping, caning, and clubbing; cutting off hands or feet, or both; cutting off ears or nose, or both; the ‘porridge pot’, the ‘shell-shave’, the ‘Rāhu’s mouth’, the ‘garland of fire’, the ‘burning hand’, the ‘bulrush twist’, the ‘bark dress’, the ‘antelope’, the ‘meat hook’, the ‘coins’, the ‘caustic pickle’, the ‘twisting bar’, the ‘straw mat’; being splashed with hot oil, being fed to the hounds, being impaled alive, and being beheaded. | T: The kings have them flogged with whips, beaten with canes, beaten with clubs; they have their hands cut off, their feet cut off, their hands and feet cut off; their ears cut off, their noses cut off, their ears and noses cut off; they have them subjected to the ‘porridge pot,’ to the ‘polished-shell shave,’ to the ‘Rāhu’s mouth,’ to the ‘fiery wreath,’ to the ‘flaming hand,’ to the ‘blades of grass,’ to the ‘bark dress,’ to the ‘antelope,’ to the ‘meat hooks,’ to the ‘coins,’ to the ‘lye pickling,’ to the ‘pivoting pin,’ to the ‘rolled-up palliasse’; and they have them splashed with boiling oil, and they have them thrown to be devoured by dogs, and they have them impaled alive on stakes, and they have their heads cut off with swords—
mn13:14.4 | S: These result in death and deadly pain. | T: whereby they incur death or deadly suffering.
mn13:14.5 | S: This too is a drawback of sensual pleasures apparent in the present life, a mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures. | T: Now this too is a danger in the case of sensual pleasures, a mass of suffering here and now…the cause being simply sensual pleasures.
mn13:15.1 | S: Furthermore, for the sake of sensual pleasures, they conduct themselves badly by way of body, speech, and mind. | T: “Again, with sensual pleasures as the cause, sensual pleasures as the source, sensual pleasures as the basis, the cause being simply sensual pleasures, people indulge in misconduct of body, speech, and mind.
mn13:15.2 | S: When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. | T: Having done so, on the dissolution of the body, after death, they reappear in states of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.
mn13:15.3 | S: This is a drawback of sensual pleasures to do with lives to come, a mass of suffering caused by sensual pleasures. | T: Now this is a danger in the case of sensual pleasures, a mass of suffering in the life to come, having sensual pleasures as its cause, sensual pleasures as its source, sensual pleasures as its basis, the cause being simply sensual pleasures.
mn13:16.1 | S: And what is the escape from sensual pleasures? | T: iii “And what, bhikkhus, is the escape in the case of sensual pleasures?
mn13:16.2 | S: Removing and giving up desire and greed for sensual pleasures: this is the escape from sensual pleasures. | T: It is the removal of desire and lust, the abandonment of desire and lust for sensual pleasures. This is the escape in the case of sensual pleasures.
mn13:17.1 | S: There are ascetics and brahmins who don’t truly understand sensual pleasures’ gratification, drawback, and escape in this way for what they are. It’s impossible for them to completely understand sensual pleasures themselves, or to instruct another so that, practicing accordingly, they will completely understand sensual pleasures. | T: “That those recluses and brahmins who do not understand as it actually is the gratification as gratification, the danger as danger, and the escape as escape in the case of sensual pleasures, can either themselves fully understand sensual pleasures or instruct another so that he can fully understand sensual pleasures—that is impossible.
mn13:17.2 | S: There are ascetics and brahmins who do truly understand sensual pleasures’ gratification, drawback, and escape in this way for what they are. It is possible for them to completely understand sensual pleasures themselves, or to instruct another so that, practicing accordingly, they will completely understand sensual pleasures. | T: That those recluses and brahmins who understand as it actually is the gratification as gratification, the danger as danger, and the escape as escape in the case of sensual pleasures, can either themselves fully understand sensual pleasures or instruct another so that he can fully understand sensual pleasures—that is possible.
mn13:18.1 | S: And what is the gratification of forms? | T: Material Form i “And what, bhikkhus, is the gratification in the case of material form?
mn13:18.2 | S: Suppose there was a girl of the brahmins, aristocrats, or householders in her fifteenth or sixteenth year, neither too tall nor too short, neither too thin nor too fat, neither too dark nor too fair. Is she not at the height of her beauty and prettiness?” | T: Suppose there were a girl of the noble class or the brahmin class or of householder stock, in her fifteenth or sixteenth year, neither too tall nor too short, neither too thin nor too fat, neither too dark nor too fair. Is her beauty and loveliness then at its height?”—
mn13:18.3 | S: “Yes, sir.” | T: “Yes, venerable sir.”—
mn13:18.4 | S: “The pleasure and happiness that arise from this beauty and prettiness | T: “Now the pleasure and joy that arise in dependence on that beauty and loveliness are the gratification in the case of material form.
mn13:18.5 | S: is the gratification of forms. | T: (none)
mn13:19.1 | S: And what is the drawback of forms? | T: ii “And what, bhikkhus, is the danger in the case of material form?
mn13:19.2 | S: Suppose that some time later you were to see that same sister—eighty, ninety, or a hundred years old—bent double, crooked, leaning on a staff, trembling as they walk, ailing, past their prime, with teeth broken, hair grey and scanty or bald, skin wrinkled, and limbs blotchy. | T: Later on one might see that same woman here at eighty, ninety, or a hundred years, aged, as crooked as a roof bracket, doubled up, supported by a walking stick, tottering, frail, her youth gone, her teeth broken, grey-haired, scanty-haired, bald, wrinkled, with limbs all blotchy.
mn13:19.3 | S: What do you think, mendicants? | T: What do you think, bhikkhus?
mn13:19.4 | S: Has not that former beauty vanished and the drawback become clear?” | T: Has her former beauty and loveliness vanished and the danger become evident?”—
mn13:19.5 | S: “Yes, sir.” | T: “Yes, venerable sir.”—
mn13:19.6 | S: “This is the drawback of forms. | T: “Bhikkhus, this is a danger in the case of material form.
mn13:20.1 | S: Furthermore, suppose that you were to see that same sister sick, suffering, gravely ill, collapsed in her own urine and feces, being picked up by some and put down by others. | T: “Again, one might see that same woman afflicted, suffering, and gravely ill, lying fouled in her own urine and excrement, lifted up by some and set down by others.
mn13:20.2 | S: What do you think, mendicants? | T: What do you think, bhikkhus?
mn13:20.3 | S: Has not that former beauty vanished and the drawback become clear?” | T: Has her former beauty and loveliness vanished and the danger become evident?”—
mn13:20.4 | S: “Yes, sir.” | T: “Yes, venerable sir.”—
mn13:20.5 | S: “This too is the drawback of forms. | T: “Bhikkhus, this too is a danger in the case of material form.
mn13:21.1 | S: Furthermore, suppose that you were to see that same sister as a corpse discarded in a charnel ground. And it had been dead for one, two, or three days, bloated, livid, and festering. | T: “Again, one might see that same woman as a corpse thrown aside in a charnel ground, one, two, or three days dead, bloated, livid, and oozing matter.
mn13:21.2 | P: ekāhamataṁ vā dvīhamataṁ vā tīhamataṁ vā, uddhumātakaṁ vinīlakaṁ vipubbakajātaṁ. | T: (none)
mn13:21.3 | S: What do you think, mendicants? | T: What do you think, bhikkhus?
mn13:21.4 | S: Has not that former beauty vanished and the drawback become clear?” | T: Has her former beauty and loveliness vanished and the danger become evident?”—
mn13:21.5 | S: “Yes, sir.” | T: “Yes, venerable sir.”—
mn13:21.6 | S: “This too is the drawback of forms. | T: “Bhikkhus, this too is a danger in the case of material form.
mn13:22.1 | S: Furthermore, suppose that you were to see that same sister as a corpse discarded in a charnel ground. And it was being devoured by crows, hawks, vultures, herons, hounds, tigers, leopards, jackals, and many kinds of little creatures … | T: “Again, one might see that same woman as a corpse thrown aside in a charnel ground, being devoured by crows, hawks, vultures, dogs, jackals, or various kinds of worms…
mn13:22.2 | P: kākehi vā khajjamānaṁ, kulalehi vā khajjamānaṁ, gijjhehi vā khajjamānaṁ, kaṅkehi vā khajjamānaṁ, sunakhehi vā khajjamānaṁ, byagghehi vā khajjamānaṁ, dīpīhi vā khajjamānaṁ, siṅgālehi vā khajjamānaṁ, vividhehi vā pāṇakajātehi khajjamānaṁ. | T: (none)
mn13:22.3 | P: Taṁ kiṁ maññatha, bhikkhave, yā purimā subhā vaṇṇanibhā sā antarahitā, ādīnavo pātubhūtoti? | T: (none)
mn13:22.4 | P: ‘Evaṁ, bhante’. | T: (none)
mn13:22.5 | P: Ayampi, bhikkhave, rūpānaṁ ādīnavo. | T: (none)
mn13:23-28.1 | S: Furthermore, suppose that you were to see that same sister as a corpse discarded in a charnel ground. | T: (none)
mn13:23-28.2 | S: And it had been reduced to a skeleton with flesh and blood, held together by sinews … A skeleton rid of flesh but smeared with blood, and held together by sinews … A skeleton rid of flesh and blood, held together by sinews … | T: …a skeleton with flesh and blood, held together with sinews…a fleshless skeleton smeared with blood, held together with sinews…a skeleton without flesh and blood, held together with sinews…
mn13:23-28.3 | S: Bones rid of sinews scattered in every direction. Here a hand-bone, there a foot-bone, here an ankle bone, there a shin-bone, here a thigh-bone, there a hip-bone, here a rib-bone, there a back-bone, here an arm-bone, there a neck-bone, here a jaw-bone, there a tooth, here the skull. … | T: disconnected bones scattered in all directions—here a hand-bone, there a foot-bone, here a thigh-bone, there a rib-bone, here a hip-bone, there a back-bone, here the skull…
mn13:23-28.4 | P: Taṁ kiṁ maññatha, bhikkhave, yā purimā subhā vaṇṇanibhā sā antarahitā, ādīnavo pātubhūtoti? | T: (none)
mn13:23-28.5 | P: ‘Evaṁ, bhante’. | T: (none)
mn13:23-28.6 | P: Ayampi, bhikkhave, rūpānaṁ ādīnavo. | T: (none)
mn13:29.1 | S: Furthermore, suppose that you were to see that same sister as a corpse discarded in a charnel ground. | T: (none)
mn13:29.2 | S: And it had been reduced to white bones, the color of shells … Decrepit bones, heaped in a pile … Bones rotted and crumbled to powder. | T: bones bleached white, the colour of shells…bones heaped up…bones more than a year old, rotted and crumbled to dust.
mn13:29.3 | S: What do you think, mendicants? | T: What do you think, bhikkhus?
mn13:29.4 | S: Has not that former beauty vanished and the drawback become clear?” | T: Has her former beauty and loveliness vanished and the danger become evident?”—
mn13:29.5 | S: “Yes, sir.” | T: “Yes, venerable sir.”—
mn13:29.6 | S: “This too is the drawback of forms. | T: “Bhikkhus, this too is a danger in the case of material form.
mn13:30.1 | S: And what is the escape from forms? | T: iii “And what, bhikkhus, is the escape in the case of material form?
mn13:30.2 | S: Removing and giving up desire and greed for forms: this is the escape from forms. | T: It is the removal of desire and lust, the abandonment of desire and lust for material form. This is the escape in the case of material form.
mn13:31.1 | S: There are ascetics and brahmins who don’t truly understand forms’ gratification, drawback, and escape in this way for what they are. It’s impossible for them to completely understand forms themselves, or to instruct another so that, practicing accordingly, they will completely understand forms. | T: “That those recluses and brahmins who do not understand as it actually is the gratification as gratification, the danger as danger, and the escape as escape in the case of material form, can either themselves fully understand material form or instruct another so that he can fully understand material form—that is impossible.
mn13:31.2 | S: There are ascetics and brahmins who do truly understand forms’ gratification, drawback, and escape in this way for what they are. It is possible for them to completely understand forms themselves, or to instruct another so that, practicing accordingly, they will completely understand forms. | T: That those recluses and brahmins who understand as it actually is the gratification as gratification, the danger as danger, and the escape as escape in the case of material form, can either themselves fully understand material form or instruct another so that he can fully understand material form—that is possible.
mn13:32.1 | S: And what is the gratification of feelings? | T: Feelings i “And what, bhikkhus, is the gratification in the case of feelings?
mn13:32.2 | S: It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. | T: Here, bhikkhus, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
mn13:32.3 | S: At that time a mendicant doesn’t intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, or hurt both; | T: On such an occasion he does not choose for his own affliction, or for another’s affliction, or for the affliction of both.
mn13:32.4 | S: they feel only feelings that are not hurtful. | T: On that occasion he feels only feeling that is free from affliction.
mn13:32.5 | S: Freedom from being hurt is the ultimate gratification of feelings, I say. | T: The highest gratification in the case of feelings is freedom from affliction, I say.
mn13:33-35.1 | S: Furthermore, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption … | T: “Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second jhāna…
mn13:33-35.2 | S: third absorption … | T: With the fading away as well of rapture…he enters upon and abides in the third jhāna…
mn13:33-35.3 | S: fourth absorption. At that time a mendicant doesn’t intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, or hurt both; | T: With the abandoning of pleasure and pain he enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna…On such an occasion he does not choose for his own affliction, or for another’s affliction, or for the affliction of both.
mn13:33-35.4 | S: they feel only feelings that are not hurtful. | T: On that occasion he feels only feeling that is free from affliction.
mn13:33-35.5 | S: Freedom from being hurt is the ultimate gratification of feelings, I say. | T: The highest gratification in the case of feelings is freedom from affliction, I say.
mn13:36.1 | S: And what is the drawback of feelings? | T: ii “And what, bhikkhus, is the danger in the case of feelings?
mn13:36.2 | S: That feelings are impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is their drawback. | T: Feelings are impermanent, suffering, and subject to change. This is the danger in the case of feelings.
mn13:37.1 | S: And what is the escape from feelings? | T: iii “And what, bhikkhus, is the escape in the case of feelings?
mn13:37.2 | S: Removing and giving up desire and greed for feelings: this is the escape from feelings. | T: It is the removal of desire and lust, the abandonment of desire and lust for feelings. This is the escape in the case of feelings.
mn13:38.1 | S: There are ascetics and brahmins who don’t truly understand feelings’ gratification, drawback, and escape in this way for what they are. It’s impossible for them to completely understand feelings themselves, or to instruct another so that, practicing accordingly, they will completely understand feelings. | T: “That those recluses and brahmins who do not understand as it actually is the gratification as gratification, the danger as danger, and the escape as escape in the case of feelings, can either themselves fully understand feelings or instruct another so that he can fully understand feelings—that is impossible.
mn13:38.2 | S: There are ascetics and brahmins who do truly understand feelings’ gratification, drawback, and escape in this way for what they are. It is possible for them to completely understand feelings themselves, or to instruct another so that, practicing accordingly, they will completely understand feelings.” | T: That those recluses and brahmins who understand as it actually is the gratification as gratification, the danger as danger, and the escape as escape in the case of feelings, can either themselves fully understand feelings or instruct another so that he can fully understand feelings—that is possible.”
mn13:38.3 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: That is what the Blessed One said.
mn13:38.4 | S: Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said. | T: The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
mn13:38.5 | P: Mahādukkhakkhandhasuttaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ tatiyaṁ. | T: (none)

