## dn15
dn15:1.0 | S: 1. Dependent Origination | T: Dependent Arising
dn15:1.1 | S: So I have heard. | T: Thus have I heard.
dn15:1.2 | S: At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Kurus, near the Kuru town named Kammāsadamma. | T: On one occasion the Exalted One was living among the Kurus, where there was a town of the Kurus named Kammāsadhamma.
dn15:1.3 | S: Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, | T: Then the Venerable Ānanda approached the Exalted One, paid homage to him, and sat down to one side. Seated, he said to the Exalted One:
dn15:1.4 | S: “It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing, | T: “It is wonderful and marvellous, venerable sir,
dn15:1.5 | S: in that this dependent origination is deep and appears deep, yet to me it seems as plain as can be.” | T: how this dependent arising is so deep and appears so deep, yet to myself it seems as clear as clear can be.”
dn15:1.6 | S: “Don’t say that, Ānanda, don’t say that! | T: “Do not say so, Ānanda! Do not say so, Ānanda!
dn15:1.7 | S: This dependent origination is deep and appears deep. | T: This dependent arising, Ānanda, is deep and it appears deep.
dn15:1.8 | S: It is because of not understanding and not penetrating this teaching that this population has become tangled like string, knotted like a ball of thread, and matted like rushes and reeds, and it doesn’t escape the places of loss, the bad places, the underworld, transmigration. | T: Because of not understanding and not penetrating this Dhamma, Ānanda, this generation has become like a tangled skein, like a knotted ball of thread, like matted rushes and reeds, and does not pass beyond saṁsāra with its plane of misery, unfortunate destinations, and lower realms.
dn15:2.1 | S: When asked, ‘Is there a specific condition for old age and death?’ you should answer, ‘There is.’ | T: “Ānanda, if one is asked: ‘Are aging and death due to a specific condition?’ one should say: ‘They are.’
dn15:2.2 | S: If they say, ‘What is a requirement for old age and death?’ you should answer, ‘Rebirth is a requirement for old age and death.’ | T: If one is asked: ‘Through what condition is there aging and death?’ one should say: ‘With birth as condition there is aging and death.’
dn15:2.3 | S: When asked, ‘Is there a specific condition for rebirth?’ you should answer, ‘There is.’ | T: “Ānanda, if one is asked: ‘Is birth due to a specific condition?’ one should say: ‘It is.’
dn15:2.4 | S: If they say, ‘What is a requirement for rebirth?’ you should answer, ‘Continued existence is a requirement for rebirth.’ | T: If one is asked: ‘Through what condition is there birth?’ one should say: ‘With existence as condition there is birth.’
dn15:2.5 | S: When asked, ‘Is there a specific condition for continued existence?’ you should answer, ‘There is.’ | T: “Ānanda, if one is asked: ‘Is existence due to a specific condition?’ one should say: ‘It is.’
dn15:2.6 | S: If they say, ‘What is a requirement for continued existence?’ you should answer, ‘Grasping is a requirement for continued existence.’ | T: If one is asked: ‘Through what condition is there existence?’ one should say: ‘With clinging as condition there is existence.’
dn15:2.7 | S: When asked, ‘Is there a specific condition for grasping?’ you should answer, ‘There is.’ | T: “Ānanda, if one is asked: ‘Is clinging due to a specific condition?’ one should say: ‘It is.’
dn15:2.8 | S: If they say, ‘What is a requirement for grasping?’ you should answer, ‘Craving is a requirement for grasping.’ | T: If one is asked: ‘Through what condition is there clinging?’ one should say: ‘With craving as condition there is clinging.’
dn15:2.9 | S: When asked, ‘Is there a specific condition for craving?’ you should answer, ‘There is.’ | T: “Ānanda, if one is asked: ‘Is craving due to a specific condition?’ one should say: ‘It is.’
dn15:2.10 | S: If they say, ‘What is a requirement for craving?’ you should answer, ‘Feeling is a requirement for craving.’ | T: If one is asked: ‘Through what condition is there craving?’ one should say: ‘With feeling as condition there is craving.’
dn15:2.11 | S: When asked, ‘Is there a specific condition for feeling?’ you should answer, ‘There is.’ | T: “Ānanda, if one is asked: ‘Is feeling due to a specific condition?’ one should say: ‘It is.’
dn15:2.12 | S: If they say, ‘What is a requirement for feeling?’ you should answer, ‘Contact is a requirement for feeling.’ | T: If one is asked: ‘Through what condition is there feeling?’ one should say: ‘With contact as condition there is feeling.’
dn15:2.13 | S: When asked, ‘Is there a specific condition for contact?’ you should answer, ‘There is.’ | T: “Ānanda, if one is asked: ‘Is contact due to a specific condition?’ one should say: ‘It is.’
dn15:2.14 | S: If they say, ‘What is a requirement for contact?’ you should answer, ‘Name and form are requirements for contact.’ | T: If one is asked: ‘Through what condition is there contact?’ one should say: ‘With mentality-materiality as condition there is contact.’
dn15:2.15 | S: When asked, ‘Is there a specific condition for name and form?’ you should answer, ‘There is.’ | T: “Ānanda, if one is asked: ‘Is mentality-materiality due to a specific condition?’ one should say: ‘It is.’
dn15:2.16 | S: If they say, ‘What is a requirement for name and form?’ you should answer, ‘Consciousness is a requirement for name and form.’ | T: If one is asked: ‘Through what condition is there mentality-materiality?’ one should say: ‘With consciousness as condition there is mentality-materiality.’
dn15:2.17 | S: When asked, ‘Is there a specific condition for consciousness?’ you should answer, ‘There is.’ | T: “Ānanda, if one is asked: ‘Is consciousness due to a specific condition?’ one should say: ‘It is.’
dn15:2.18 | S: If they say, ‘What is a requirement for consciousness?’ you should answer, ‘Name and form are requirements for consciousness.’ | T: If one is asked: ‘Through what condition is there consciousness?’ one should say: ‘With mentality-materiality as condition there is consciousness.’
dn15:3.1 | S: So: name and form are requirements for consciousness. Consciousness is a requirement for name and form. Name and form are requirements for contact. Contact is a requirement for feeling. Feeling is a requirement for craving. Craving is a requirement for grasping. Grasping is a requirement for continued existence. Continued existence is a requirement for rebirth. Rebirth is a requirement for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be. | T: “Thus, Ānanda, with mentality-materiality as condition there is consciousness; with consciousness as condition there is mentality-materiality; with mentality-materiality as condition there is contact; with contact as condition there is feeling; with feeling as condition there is craving; with craving as condition there is clinging; with clinging as condition there is existence; with existence as condition there is birth; and with birth as condition, aging and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair come to be.
dn15:3.2 | S: That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. | T: Such is the origin of this entire mass of suffering.
dn15:4.1 | S: ‘Rebirth is a requirement for old age and death’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so. | T: Aging and Death “It was said: ‘With birth as condition there is aging and death.’ How that is so, Ānanda, should be understood in this way:
dn15:4.2 | S: Suppose there were totally and utterly no rebirth for anyone anywhere. | T: If there were absolutely and utterly no birth of any kind anywhere—
dn15:4.3 | S: That is, there were no rebirth of sentient beings into their various realms—of gods, centaurs, spirits, creatures, humans, quadrupeds, birds, or reptiles, each into their own realm. When there’s no rebirth at all, with the cessation of rebirth, would old age and death still be found?” | T: that is, of gods into the state of gods, of celestials into the state of celestials, of spirits, demons, human beings, quadrupeds, winged creatures, and reptiles, each into their own state—if there were no birth of beings of any sort into any state, then, in the complete absence of birth, with the cessation of birth, would aging and death be discerned?”
dn15:4.4 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.”
dn15:4.5 | S: “That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of old age and death, namely rebirth. | T: “Therefore, Ānanda, this is the cause, source, origin, and condition for aging and death, namely, birth.
dn15:5.1 | S: ‘Continued existence is a requirement for rebirth’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so. | T: Birth “It was said: ‘With existence as condition there is birth.’ How that is so, Ānanda, should be understood in this way:
dn15:5.2 | S: Suppose there were totally and utterly no continued existence for anyone anywhere. | T: If there were absolutely and utterly no existence of any kind anywhere—
dn15:5.3 | S: That is, continued existence in the sensual realm, the realm of luminous form, or the formless realm. When there’s no continued existence at all, with the cessation of continued existence, would rebirth still be found?” | T: that is, no sense-sphere existence, fine-material existence, or immaterial existence—then, in the complete absence of existence, with the cessation of existence, would birth be discerned?”
dn15:5.4 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.”
dn15:5.5 | S: “That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of rebirth, namely continued existence. | T: “Therefore, Ānanda, this is the cause, source, origin, and condition for birth, namely, existence.
dn15:6.1 | S: ‘Grasping is a requirement for continued existence’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so. | T: Existence “It was said: ‘With clinging as condition there is existence.’ How that is so, Ānanda, should be understood in this way:
dn15:6.2 | S: Suppose there were totally and utterly no grasping for anyone anywhere. | T: If there were absolutely and utterly no clinging of any kind anywhere—
dn15:6.3 | S: That is, grasping at sensual pleasures, views, precepts and observances, and theories of a self. When there’s no grasping at all, with the cessation of grasping, would continued existence still be found?” | T: that is, no clinging to sense pleasures, clinging to views, clinging to precepts and observances, or clinging to a doctrine of self—then, in the complete absence of clinging, with the cessation of clinging, would existence be discerned?”
dn15:6.4 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.”
dn15:6.5 | S: “That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of continued existence, namely grasping. | T: “Therefore, Ānanda, this is the cause, source, origin, and condition for existence, namely, clinging.
dn15:7.1 | S: ‘Craving is a requirement for grasping’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so. | T: Clinging “It was said: ‘With craving as condition there is clinging.’ How that is so, Ānanda, should be understood in this way:
dn15:7.2 | S: Suppose there were totally and utterly no craving for anyone anywhere. | T: If there were absolutely and utterly no craving of any kind anywhere—
dn15:7.3 | S: That is, craving for sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. When there’s no craving at all, with the cessation of craving, would grasping still be found?” | T: that is, no craving for visible forms, craving for sounds, craving for smells, craving for tastes, craving for tangibles, or craving for mental objects—then, in the complete absence of craving, with the cessation of craving, would clinging be discerned?”
dn15:7.4 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.”
dn15:7.5 | S: “That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of grasping, namely craving. | T: “Therefore, Ānanda, this is the cause, source, origin, and condition for clinging, namely, craving.
dn15:8.1 | S: ‘Feeling is a requirement for craving’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so. | T: Craving “It was said: ‘With feeling as condition there is craving.’ How that is so, Ānanda, should be understood in this way:
dn15:8.2 | S: Suppose there were totally and utterly no feeling for anyone anywhere. | T: If there were absolutely and utterly no feeling of any kind anywhere—
dn15:8.3 | S: That is, feeling born of contact through the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. When there’s no feeling at all, with the cessation of feeling, would craving still be found?” | T: that is, no feeling born of eye-contact, feeling born of ear-contact, feeling born of nose-contact, feeling born of tongue-contact, feeling born of body-contact, or feeling born of mind-contact—then, in the complete absence of feeling, with the cessation of feeling, would craving be discerned?”
dn15:8.4 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.”
dn15:8.5 | S: “That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of craving, namely feeling. | T: “Therefore, Ānanda, this is the cause, source, origin, and condition for craving, namely, feeling.
dn15:9.1 | S: So it is, Ānanda, that feeling gives rise to craving. Craving gives rise to searching. Searching gives rise to gaining material things. Gaining material things gives rise to evaluation. Evaluation gives rise to desire and lust. Desire and lust gives rise to attachment. Attachment gives rise to ownership. Ownership gives rise to stinginess. Stinginess gives rise to safeguarding. | T: Dependent on Craving “Thus, Ānanda, in dependence upon feeling there is craving; in dependence upon craving there is pursuit; in dependence upon pursuit there is gain; in dependence upon gain there is decision-making; in dependence upon decision-making there is desire and lust; in dependence upon desire and lust there is attachment; in dependence upon attachment there is possessiveness; in dependence upon possessiveness there is stinginess; in dependence upon stinginess there is safeguarding;
dn15:9.2 | S: Owing to safeguarding, many bad, unskillful things come to be: taking up the rod and the sword, quarrels, arguments, and disputes, accusations, backbiting, and lies. | T: and because of safeguarding, various evil unwholesome phenomena originate—the taking up of clubs and weapons, conflicts, quarrels, and disputes, insulting speech, slander, and falsehoods.
dn15:10.1 | S: ‘Owing to safeguarding, many bad, unskillful things come to be: taking up the rod and the sword, quarrels, arguments, and disputes, accusations, backbiting, and lies’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so. | T: “It was said: ‘Because of safeguarding, various evil unwholesome phenomena originate—the taking up of clubs and weapons, conflicts, quarrels, and disputes, insulting speech, slander, and falsehoods.’ How that is so, Ānanda, should be understood in this way:
dn15:10.2 | S: Suppose there were totally and utterly no safeguarding for anyone anywhere. When there’s no safeguarding at all, with the cessation of safeguarding, would those many bad, unskillful things still come to be?” | T: If there were absolutely and utterly no safeguarding of any kind anywhere, then, in the complete absence of safeguarding, with the cessation of safeguarding, would those various evil unwholesome phenomena originate?”
dn15:10.3 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.”
dn15:10.4 | S: “That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason for the origination of those many bad, unskillful things, namely safeguarding. | T: “Therefore, Ānanda, this is the cause, source, origin, and condition for those various evil unwholesome phenomena, namely, safeguarding.
dn15:11.1 | S: ‘Stinginess gives rise to safeguarding’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so. | T: “It was said: ‘In dependence upon stinginess there is safeguarding.’ How that is so, Ānanda, should be understood in this way:
dn15:11.2 | S: Suppose there were totally and utterly no stinginess for anyone anywhere. When there’s no stinginess at all, with the cessation of stinginess, would safeguarding still be found?” | T: If there were absolutely and utterly no stinginess of any kind anywhere, then, in the complete absence of stinginess, with the cessation of stinginess, would safeguarding be discerned?”
dn15:11.3 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.”
dn15:11.4 | S: “That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of safeguarding, namely stinginess. | T: “Therefore, Ānanda, this is the cause, source, origin, and condition for safeguarding, namely, stinginess.
dn15:12.1 | S: ‘Ownership gives rise to stinginess’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so. | T: “It was said: ‘In dependence upon possessiveness there is stinginess.’ How that is so, Ānanda, should be understood in this way:
dn15:12.2 | S: Suppose there were totally and utterly no ownership for anyone anywhere. When there’s no ownership at all, with the cessation of ownership, would stinginess still be found?” | T: If there were absolutely and utterly no possessiveness of any kind anywhere, then, in the complete absence of possessiveness, with the cessation of possessiveness, would stinginess be discerned?”
dn15:12.3 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.”
dn15:12.4 | S: “That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of stinginess, namely ownership. | T: “Therefore, Ānanda, this is the cause, source, origin, and condition for stinginess, namely, possessiveness.
dn15:13.1 | S: ‘Attachment gives rise to ownership’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so. | T: “It was said: ‘In dependence upon attachment there is possessiveness.’ How that is so, Ānanda, should be understood in this way:
dn15:13.2 | S: Suppose there were totally and utterly no attachment for anyone anywhere. When there’s no attachment at all, with the cessation of attachment, would ownership still be found?” | T: If there were absolutely and utterly no attachment of any kind anywhere, then, in the complete absence of attachment, with the cessation of attachment, would possessiveness be discerned?”
dn15:13.3 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.”
dn15:13.4 | S: “That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of ownership, namely attachment. | T: “Therefore, Ānanda, this is the cause, source, origin, and condition for possessiveness, namely, attachment.
dn15:14.1 | S: ‘Desire and lust gives rise to attachment’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so. | T: “It was said: ‘In dependence upon desire and lust there is attachment.’ How that is so, Ānanda, should be understood in this way:
dn15:14.2 | S: Suppose there were totally and utterly no desire and lust for anyone anywhere. When there’s no desire and lust at all, with the cessation of desire and lust, would attachment still be found?” | T: If there were absolutely and utterly no desire and lust of any kind anywhere, then, in the complete absence of desire and lust, with the cessation of desire and lust, would attachment be discerned?”
dn15:14.3 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.”
dn15:14.4 | S: “That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of attachment, namely desire and lust. | T: “Therefore, Ānanda, this is the cause, source, origin, and condition for attachment, namely, desire and lust.
dn15:15.1 | S: Evaluation gives rise to desire and lust’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so. | T: “It was said: ‘In dependence upon decision-making there is desire and lust.’ How that is so, Ānanda, should be understood in this way:
dn15:15.2 | S: Suppose there were totally and utterly no evaluation for anyone anywhere. When there’s no evaluation at all, with the cessation of evaluation, would desire and lust still be found?” | T: If there were absolutely and utterly no decision-making of any kind anywhere, then, in the complete absence of decision-making, with the cessation of decision-making, would desire and lust be discerned?”
dn15:15.3 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.”
dn15:15.4 | S: “That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of desire and lust, namely evaluation. | T: “Therefore, Ānanda, this is the cause, source, origin, and condition for desire and lust, namely, decision-making.
dn15:16.1 | S: ‘Gaining material things gives rise to evaluation’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so. | T: “It was said: ‘In dependence upon gain there is decision-making.’ How that is so, Ānanda, should be understood in this way:
dn15:16.2 | S: Suppose there were totally and utterly no gaining of material things for anyone anywhere. When there’s no gaining of material things at all, with the cessation of gaining material things, would evaluation still be found?” | T: If there were absolutely and utterly no gain of any kind anywhere, then, in the complete absence of gain, with the cessation of gain, would decision-making be discerned?”
dn15:16.3 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.”
dn15:16.4 | S: “That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of evaluation, namely the gaining of material things. | T: “Therefore, Ānanda, this is the cause, source, origin, and condition for decision-making, namely, gain.
dn15:17.1 | S: ‘Searching gives rise to gaining material things’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so. | T: “It was said: ‘In dependence upon pursuit there is gain.’ How that is so, Ānanda, should be understood in this way:
dn15:17.2 | S: Suppose there were totally and utterly no searching for anyone anywhere. When there’s no searching at all, with the cessation of searching, would the gaining of material things still be found?” | T: If there were absolutely and utterly no pursuit of any kind anywhere, then, in the complete absence of pursuit, with the cessation of pursuit, would gain be discerned?”
dn15:17.3 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.”
dn15:17.4 | S: “That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of gaining material things, namely searching. | T: “Therefore, Ānanda, this is the cause, source, origin, and condition for gain, namely, pursuit.
dn15:18.1 | S: ‘Craving gives rise to searching’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so. | T: “It was said: ‘In dependence upon craving there is pursuit.’ How that is so, Ānanda, should be understood in this way:
dn15:18.2 | S: Suppose there were totally and utterly no craving for anyone anywhere. | T: If there were absolutely and utterly no craving of any kind anywhere—
dn15:18.3 | S: That is, craving for sensual pleasures, craving for continued existence, and craving for nonexistence. When there’s no craving at all, with the cessation of craving, would searching still be found?” | T: that is, no craving for sense pleasures, craving for existence, or craving for non-existence—then, in the complete absence of craving, with the cessation of craving, would pursuit be discerned?”
dn15:18.4 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.”
dn15:18.5 | S: “That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of searching, namely craving. | T: “Therefore, Ānanda, this is the cause, source, origin, and condition for pursuit, namely, craving.
dn15:18.6 | S: And so, Ānanda, these two things meet at the two aspects of feeling. | T: “Thus, Ānanda, these two phenomena, being a duality, converge into a unity in feeling.
dn15:19.1 | S: ‘Contact is a requirement for feeling’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so. | T: Feeling “It was said: ‘With contact as condition there is feeling.’ How that is so, Ānanda, should be understood in this way:
dn15:19.2 | S: Suppose there were totally and utterly no contact for anyone anywhere. | T: If there were absolutely and utterly no contact of any kind anywhere—
dn15:19.3 | S: That is, contact through the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. When there’s no contact at all, with the cessation of contact, would feeling still be found?” | T: that is, no eye-contact, ear-contact, nose-contact, tongue-contact, body-contact, or mind-contact—then, in the complete absence of contact, with the cessation of contact, would feeling be discerned?”
dn15:19.4 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.”
dn15:19.5 | S: “That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of feeling, namely contact. | T: “Therefore, Ānanda, this is the cause, source, origin, and condition for feeling, namely, contact.
dn15:20.1 | S: ‘Name and form are requirements for contact’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so. | T: Contact “It was said: ‘With mentality-materiality as condition there is contact.’ How that is so, Ānanda, should be understood in this way:
dn15:20.2 | S: Suppose there were none of the features, attributes, signs, and details by which the set of mental phenomena known as name is found. Would labeling contact still be found in the set of physical phenomena?” | T: If those qualities, traits, signs, and indicators through which there is a description of the mental body were all absent, would designation-contact be discerned in the material body?”
dn15:20.3 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.”
dn15:20.4 | S: “Suppose there were none of the features, attributes, signs, and details by which the set of physical phenomena known as form is found. Would impingement contact still be found in the set of mental phenomena?” | T: “If those qualities, traits, signs, and indicators through which there is a description of the material body were all absent, would impingement-contact be discerned in the mental body?”
dn15:20.5 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.”
dn15:20.6 | S: “Suppose there were none of the features, attributes, signs, and details by which the set of phenomena known as name and the set of phenomena known as form are found. Would either labeling contact or impingement contact still be found?” | T: “If those qualities, traits, signs, and indicators through which there is a description of the mental body and the material body were all absent, would either designation-contact or impingement-contact be discerned?”
dn15:20.7 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.”
dn15:20.8 | S: “Suppose there were none of the features, attributes, signs, and details by which name and form are found. Would contact still be found?” | T: “If those qualities, traits, signs, and indicators through which there is a description of mentality-materiality were all absent, would contact be discerned?”
dn15:20.9 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.”
dn15:20.10 | S: “That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of contact, namely name and form. | T: “Therefore, Ānanda, this is the cause, source, origin, and condition for contact, namely, mentality-materiality.
dn15:21.1 | S: ‘Consciousness is a requirement for name and form’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so. | T: Mentality-Materiality “It was said: ‘With consciousness as condition there is mentality-materiality.’ How that is so, Ānanda, should be understood in this way:
dn15:21.2 | S: If consciousness were not conceived in the mother’s womb, would name and form coagulate there?” | T: If consciousness were not to descend into the mother’s womb, would mentality-materiality take shape in the womb?”
dn15:21.3 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.”
dn15:21.4 | S: “If consciousness, after being conceived in the mother’s womb, were to be miscarried, would name and form be born into this place?” | T: “If, after descending into the womb, consciousness were to depart, would mentality-materiality be generated into this present state of being?”
dn15:21.5 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.”
dn15:21.6 | S: “If the consciousness of a young boy or girl were to be cut off, would name and form achieve growth, increase, and maturity?” | T: “If the consciousness of a young boy or girl were to be cut off, would mentality-materiality grow up, develop, and reach maturity?”
dn15:21.7 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.”
dn15:21.8 | S: “That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of name and form, namely consciousness. | T: “Therefore, Ānanda, this is the cause, source, origin, and condition for mentality-materiality, namely, consciousness.
dn15:22.1 | S: ‘Name and form are requirements for consciousness’—that’s what I said. And this is a way to understand how this is so. | T: Consciousness “It was said: ‘With mentality-materiality as condition there is consciousness.’ How that is so, Ānanda, should be understood in this way:
dn15:22.2 | S: If consciousness were not established in name and form, would the coming to be of the origin of suffering—of rebirth, old age, and death in the future—be found?” | T: If consciousness were not to gain a footing in mentality-materiality, would an origination of the mass of suffering—of future birth, aging, and death—be discerned?”
dn15:22.3 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.”
dn15:22.4 | S: “That’s why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of consciousness, namely name and form. | T: “Therefore, Ānanda, this is the cause, source, origin, and condition for consciousness, namely, mentality-materiality.
dn15:22.5 | S: This is the extent to which one may be reborn, grow old, die, pass away, or reappear. | T: “It is to this extent, Ānanda, that one can be born, age, and die, pass away and re-arise,
dn15:22.6 | S: This is how far the scope of labeling, definition, and description extends; how far the sphere of wisdom extends; how far the cycle of rebirths spins so that this state of being may be found; namely, name and form together with consciousness. | T: to this extent that there is a pathway for designation, to this extent that there is a pathway for language, to this extent that there is a pathway for description, to this extent that there is a sphere for wisdom, to this extent that the round turns for describing this state of being, that is, when there is mentality-materiality together with consciousness.
dn15:23.0 | S: 2. Describing the Self | T: Descriptions of Self
dn15:23.1 | S: How do those who describe the self describe it? | T: “In what ways, Ānanda, does one describing self describe it?
dn15:23.2 | S: They describe it as formed and limited: | T: Describing self as having material form and as limited, one describes it thus:
dn15:23.3 | S: ‘My self is formed and limited.’ | T: ‘My self has material form and is limited.’
dn15:23.4 | S: Or they describe it as formed and infinite: | T: Or describing self as having material form and as infinite, one describes it thus:
dn15:23.5 | S: ‘My self is formed and infinite.’ | T: ‘My self has material form and is infinite.’
dn15:23.6 | S: Or they describe it as formless and limited: | T: Or describing self as immaterial and limited, one describes it thus:
dn15:23.7 | S: ‘My self is formless and limited.’ | T: ‘My self is immaterial and limited.’
dn15:23.8 | S: Or they describe it as formless and infinite: | T: Or describing self as immaterial and infinite, one describes it thus:
dn15:23.9 | S: ‘My self is formless and infinite.’ | T: ‘My self is immaterial and infinite.’
dn15:24.1 | S: Now, take those who describe the self as formed and limited. | T: “Therein, Ānanda, one who describes self as having material form and as limited either describes such a self (as existing only) in the present or he describes such a self (as existing) there in the future, or he thinks: ‘That which is not thus, I will convert towards the state of being thus.’
dn15:24.2 | S: They describe the self in the present as formed and limited; or they describe it as sure to be in some other place formed and limited; or else they think: ‘Though it is not like that, I will ensure it is provided with what it needs to become like that.’ | T: (none)
dn15:24.3 | S: This being so, it’s appropriate to say that a theory of self as formed and limited underlies them. | T: This being so, it can aptly be said that a settled view (of self) as having material form and as limited underlies this.
dn15:24.4 | S: Now, take those who describe the self as formed and infinite … | T: “One who describes self as having material form and as infinite either describes such a self (as existing only) in the present or he describes such a self (as existing) there in the future, or he thinks: ‘That which is not thus, I will convert towards the state of being thus.’
dn15:24.5 | P: Etarahi vā so rūpiṁ anantaṁ attānaṁ paññapento paññapeti, tattha bhāviṁ vā so rūpiṁ anantaṁ attānaṁ paññapento paññapeti, ‘atathaṁ vā pana santaṁ tathattāya upakappessāmī’ti iti vā panassa hoti. | T: (none)
dn15:24.6 | P: Evaṁ santaṁ kho, ānanda, rūpiṁ anantattānudiṭṭhi anusetīti iccālaṁ vacanāya. | T: This being so, it can aptly be said that a settled view (of self) as having material form and as infinite underlies this.
dn15:24.7 | S: formless and limited … | T: “One who describes self as immaterial and limited either describes such a self (as existing only) in the present or he describes such a self (as existing) there in the future, or he thinks: ‘That which is not thus, I will convert towards the state of being thus.’
dn15:24.8 | P: Etarahi vā so arūpiṁ parittaṁ attānaṁ paññapento paññapeti, tattha bhāviṁ vā so arūpiṁ parittaṁ attānaṁ paññapento paññapeti, ‘atathaṁ vā pana santaṁ tathattāya upakappessāmī’ti iti vā panassa hoti. | T: (none)
dn15:24.9 | P: Evaṁ santaṁ kho, ānanda, arūpiṁ parittattānudiṭṭhi anusetīti iccālaṁ vacanāya. | T: This being so, it can aptly be said that a settled view (of self) as immaterial and limited underlies this.
dn15:24.10 | S: formless and infinite. | T: “One who describes self as immaterial and infinite
dn15:24.11 | S: They describe the self as formless and infinite in the present; or as sure to become formless and infinite in some other place; or else they think: ‘Though it is not like that, I will ensure it is provided with what it needs to become like that.’ | T: either describes such a self (as existing only) in the present or he describes such a self (as existing) there in the future, or he thinks: ‘That which is not thus, I will convert towards the state of being thus.’
dn15:24.12 | S: This being so, it’s appropriate to say that a theory of self as formless and infinite underlies them. | T: This being so, it can aptly be said that a settled view (of self) as immaterial and infinite underlies this.
dn15:24.13 | S: That’s how those who describe the self describe it. | T: “It is in these ways, Ānanda, that one describing self describes it.
dn15:25.0 | S: 3. Not Describing the Self | T: Non-Descriptions of Self
dn15:25.1 | S: How do those who don’t describe the self not describe it? | T: “In what ways, Ānanda, does one not describing self not describe it?
dn15:25.2 | S: They don’t describe it as formed and limited … | T: Not describing self as having material form and as limited, one does not describe it thus: ‘My self has material form and is limited.’
dn15:25.3 | P: ‘rūpī me paritto attā’ti. | T: (none)
dn15:25.4 | S: formed and infinite … | T: Or not describing self as having material form and as infinite, one does not describe it thus: ‘My self has material form and is infinite.’
dn15:25.5 | P: ‘rūpī me ananto attā’ti. | T: (none)
dn15:25.6 | S: formless and limited … | T: Or not describing self as immaterial and limited, one does not describe it thus: ‘My self is immaterial and limited.’
dn15:25.7 | P: ‘arūpī me paritto attā’ti. | T: (none)
dn15:25.8 | S: formless and infinite: | T: Or not describing self as immaterial and infinite, one does not describe it thus:
dn15:25.9 | S: ‘My self is formless and infinite.’ | T: ‘My self is immaterial and infinite.’
dn15:26.1 | S: Now, take those who don’t describe the self as formed and limited … | T: “Therein, Ānanda, one who does not describe self as having material form and as limited
dn15:26.2 | P: Etarahi vā so rūpiṁ parittaṁ attānaṁ na paññapento na paññapeti, tattha bhāviṁ vā so rūpiṁ parittaṁ attānaṁ na paññapento na paññapeti, ‘atathaṁ vā pana santaṁ tathattāya upakappessāmī’ti iti vā panassa na hoti. | T: does not describe such a self (as existing only) in the present, nor does he describe such a self (as existing) there in the future, nor does he think: ‘That which is not thus, I will convert towards the state of being thus.’
dn15:26.3 | P: Evaṁ santaṁ kho, ānanda, rūpiṁ parittattānudiṭṭhi nānusetīti iccālaṁ vacanāya. | T: This being so, it can aptly be said that a settled view (of self) as having material form and as limited does not underlie this.
dn15:26.4 | S: formed and infinite … | T: “One who does not describe self as having material form and as infinite
dn15:26.5 | P: Etarahi vā so rūpiṁ anantaṁ attānaṁ na paññapento na paññapeti, tattha bhāviṁ vā so rūpiṁ anantaṁ attānaṁ na paññapento na paññapeti, ‘atathaṁ vā pana santaṁ tathattāya upakappessāmī’ti iti vā panassa na hoti. | T: does not describe such a self (as existing only) in the present, nor does he describe such a self (as existing) there in the future, nor does he think: ‘That which is not thus, I will convert towards the state of being thus.’
dn15:26.6 | P: Evaṁ santaṁ kho, ānanda, rūpiṁ anantattānudiṭṭhi nānusetīti iccālaṁ vacanāya. | T: This being so, it can aptly be said that a settled view (of self) as having material form and as infinite does not underlie this.
dn15:26.7 | S: formless and limited … | T: “One who does not describe self as immaterial and limited
dn15:26.8 | P: Etarahi vā so arūpiṁ parittaṁ attānaṁ na paññapento na paññapeti, tattha bhāviṁ vā so arūpiṁ parittaṁ attānaṁ na paññapento na paññapeti, ‘atathaṁ vā pana santaṁ tathattāya upakappessāmī’ti iti vā panassa na hoti. | T: does not describe such a self (as existing only) in the present, nor does he describe such a self (as existing) there in the future, nor does he think: ‘That which is not thus, I will convert towards the state of being thus.’
dn15:26.9 | P: Evaṁ santaṁ kho, ānanda, arūpiṁ parittattānudiṭṭhi nānusetīti iccālaṁ vacanāya. | T: This being so, it can aptly be said that a settled view (of self) as immaterial and limited does not underlie this.
dn15:26.10 | S: formless and infinite. | T: “One who describes self as immaterial and infinite
dn15:26.11 | S: They don’t describe the self in the present as formless and infinite; or as sure to become in some other place formless and infinite; and they don’t think: ‘Though it is not like that, I will ensure it is provided with what it needs to become like that.’ | T: does not describe such a self (as existing only) in the present, nor does he describe such a self (as existing) there in the future, nor does he think: ‘That which is not thus, I will convert towards the state of being thus.’
dn15:26.12 | S: This being so, it’s appropriate to say that a theory of self as formless and infinite doesn’t underlie them. | T: This being so, it can aptly be said that a settled view (of self) as immaterial and infinite does not underlie this.
dn15:26.13 | S: That’s how those who don’t describe the self don’t describe it. | T: “It is in these ways, Ānanda, that one not describing self does not describe it.
dn15:27.0 | S: 4. Regarding a Self | T: Considerations of Self
dn15:27.1 | S: How do those who regard the self regard it? | T: “In what ways, Ānanda, does one considering (the idea of) self consider it?
dn15:27.2 | S: They regard feeling as self: | T: One considering (the idea of) self either considers feeling as self, saying:
dn15:27.3 | S: ‘Feeling is my self.’ | T: ‘Feeling is my self.’
dn15:27.4 | S: Or they regard it like this: ‘Feeling is definitely not my self. My self does not experience feeling.’ | T: Or he considers: ‘Feeling is not my self; my self is without experience of feeling.’
dn15:27.5 | S: Or they regard it like this: ‘Feeling is definitely not my self. But it’s not that my self does not experience feeling. My self feels, for my self is liable to feel.’ | T: Or he considers: ‘Feeling is not my self, but my self is not without experience of feeling. My self feels; for my self is subject to feeling.’
dn15:28.1 | S: Now, as to those who say: | T: “Therein, Ānanda, the one who says
dn15:28.2 | S: ‘Feeling is my self.’ | T: ‘Feeling is my self’
dn15:28.3 | S: You should say this to them: | T: should be asked:
dn15:28.4 | S: ‘Reverend, there are three feelings: | T: ‘Friend, there are these three kinds of feeling—
dn15:28.5 | S: pleasant, painful, and neutral. | T: pleasant feeling, painful feeling, and neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling.
dn15:28.6 | S: Which one of these do you regard as self?’ | T: Of these three kinds of feeling, which do you consider as self?’
dn15:28.7 | S: Ānanda, at a time when you feel a pleasant feeling, you don’t feel a painful or neutral feeling; | T: “Ānanda, on the occasion when one experiences a pleasant feeling one does not, on that same occasion, experience a painful feeling or a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling;
dn15:28.8 | S: you only feel a pleasant feeling. | T: on that occasion one experiences only a pleasant feeling.
dn15:28.9 | S: At a time when you feel a painful feeling, you don’t feel a pleasant or neutral feeling; | T: On the occasion when one experiences a painful feeling one does not, on that same occasion, experience a pleasant feeling or a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling;
dn15:28.10 | S: you only feel a painful feeling. | T: on that occasion one experiences only a painful feeling.
dn15:28.11 | S: At a time when you feel a neutral feeling, you don’t feel a pleasant or painful feeling; | T: On the occasion when one experiences a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling one does not, on that same occasion, experience a pleasant feeling or a painful feeling;
dn15:28.12 | S: you only feel a neutral feeling. | T: on that occasion one experiences only a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling.
dn15:29.1 | S: Pleasant feelings, painful feelings, and neutral feelings are all impermanent, conditioned, dependently originated, liable to end, vanish, fade away, and cease. | T: “Ānanda, pleasant feeling is impermanent, conditioned, dependently arisen, subject to destruction, falling away, fading out, and ceasing.
dn15:29.2 | P: Dukkhāpi kho, ānanda, vedanā aniccā saṅkhatā paṭiccasamuppannā khayadhammā vayadhammā virāgadhammā nirodhadhammā. | T: Painful feeling is impermanent, conditioned, dependently arisen, subject to destruction, falling away, fading out, and ceasing.
dn15:29.3 | P: Adukkhamasukhāpi kho, ānanda, vedanā aniccā saṅkhatā paṭiccasamuppannā khayadhammā vayadhammā virāgadhammā nirodhadhammā. | T: Neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling is impermanent, conditioned, dependently arisen, subject to destruction, falling away, fading out, and ceasing.
dn15:29.4 | S: When feeling a pleasant feeling they think: ‘This is my self.’ | T: “If, when experiencing a pleasant feeling, one thinks: ‘This is my self,’
dn15:29.5 | S: When their pleasant feeling ceases they think: ‘My self has expired.’ | T: then with the ceasing of that pleasant feeling one thinks: ‘My self has disappeared.’
dn15:29.6 | S: When feeling a painful feeling they think: ‘This is my self.’ | T: If, when experiencing a painful feeling, one thinks: ‘This is my self,’
dn15:29.7 | S: When their painful feeling ceases they think: ‘My self has expired.’ | T: then with the ceasing of that painful feeling one thinks: ‘My self has disappeared.’
dn15:29.8 | S: When feeling a neutral feeling they think: ‘This is my self.’ | T: If, when experiencing a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, one thinks: ‘This is my self,’
dn15:29.9 | S: When their neutral feeling ceases they think: ‘My self has expired.’ | T: then with the ceasing of that neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling one thinks: ‘My self has disappeared.’
dn15:29.10 | S: So those who say ‘feeling is my self’ regard as self that which is evidently impermanent, mixed with pleasure and pain, and liable to rise and fall. | T: “Thus one who says ‘Feeling is my self’ considers as self something which, even here and now, is impermanent, a mixture of pleasure and pain, and subject to arising and falling away.
dn15:29.11 | S: That’s why it’s not acceptable to regard feeling as my self. | T: Therefore, Ānanda, because of this it is not acceptable to consider: ‘Feeling is my self.’
dn15:30.1 | S: Now, as to those who say: | T: “Ānanda, the one who says
dn15:30.2 | S: ‘Feeling is definitely not my self. My self does not experience feeling.’ You should say this to them, | T: ‘Feeling is not my self; my self is without experience of feeling’—he should be asked:
dn15:30.3 | S: ‘But reverend, where there is nothing felt at all, would the thought “I am” occur there?’” | T: ‘Friend, where there is nothing at all that is felt, could the idea “I am” occur there?’.”
dn15:30.4 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.”
dn15:30.5 | S: “That’s why it’s not acceptable to regard self as that which does not experience feeling. | T: “Therefore, Ānanda, because of this it is not acceptable to consider: ‘Feeling is not my self; my self is without experience of feeling.’
dn15:31.1 | S: Now, as to those who say: | T: “Ānanda, the one who says
dn15:31.2 | S: ‘Feeling is definitely not my self. But it’s not that my self does not experience feeling. My self feels, for my self is liable to feel.’ | T: ‘Feeling is not my self, but my self is not without experience of feeling. My self feels; for my self is subject to feeling’—
dn15:31.3 | S: You should say this to them, | T: he should be asked:
dn15:31.4 | S: ‘Suppose feelings were to totally and utterly cease without remainder. | T: ‘Friend, if feeling were to cease absolutely and utterly without remainder,
dn15:31.5 | S: When there’s no feeling at all, with the cessation of feeling, would the thought “I am this” occur there?’” | T: then, in the complete absence of feeling, with the cessation of feeling, could (the idea) “I am this” occur there?’.”
dn15:31.6 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.”
dn15:31.7 | S: “That’s why it’s not acceptable to regard self as that which is liable to feel. | T: “Therefore, Ānanda, because of this it is not acceptable to consider: ‘Feeling is not my self, but my self is not without experience of feeling. My self feels; for my self is subject to feeling.’
dn15:32.1 | S: When a mendicant does not regard feeling as self; does not regard self as not experiencing feeling; and does not regard it thus: ‘my self feels, for my self is liable to feel’— | T: “Ānanda, when a bhikkhu does not consider feeling as self, and does not consider self as without experience of feeling, and does not consider: ‘My self feels; for my self is subject to feeling’—
dn15:32.2 | S: not regarding in this way, they don’t grasp at anything in the world. | T: then, being without such considerations, he does not cling to anything in the world.
dn15:32.3 | S: Not grasping, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished. | T: Not clinging, he is not agitated. Not being agitated, he personally attains nibbāna.
dn15:32.4 | S: They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’ | T: He understands: ‘Destroyed is birth, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no returning to this state of being.’
dn15:32.5 | S: It wouldn’t be appropriate to say that a mendicant whose mind is freed like this holds the following views: | T: “Ānanda, if anyone should say of a bhikkhu whose mind has been thus liberated, that he holds the view
dn15:32.6 | S: ‘A realized one still exists after death’; | T: ‘A Tathāgata exists after death’—that would not be proper;
dn15:32.7 | S: ‘A realized one no longer exists after death’; | T: or that he holds the view ‘A Tathāgata does not exist after death’—that would not be proper;
dn15:32.8 | S: ‘A realized one both still exists and no longer exists after death’; | T: or that he holds the view ‘A Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death’—that would not be proper;
dn15:32.9 | S: ‘A realized one neither still exists nor no longer exists after death’. | T: or that he holds the view ‘A Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death’—that would not be proper.
dn15:32.10 | S: Why is that? | T: For what reason?
dn15:32.11 | S: A mendicant is freed by directly knowing this: how far labeling and the scope of labeling extend; how far definition and the scope of definition extend; how far description and the scope of description extend; how far wisdom and the sphere of wisdom extend; how far the cycle of rebirths and its continuation extend. It wouldn’t be appropriate to say that a mendicant freed by directly knowing this holds the view: ‘There is no such thing as knowing and seeing.’ | T: Because that bhikkhu is liberated by directly knowing this: the extent of designation and the extent of the pathway for designation, the extent of language and the extent of the pathway for language, the extent of description and the extent of the pathway for description, the extent of wisdom and the extent of the sphere for wisdom, the extent of the round and the extent to which the round turns. To say of a bhikkhu who is liberated by directly knowing this that he holds the view ‘One does not know and does not see’—that would not be proper.
dn15:33.0 | S: 5. Planes of Consciousness | T: The Seven Stations for Consciousness
dn15:33.1 | S: Ānanda, there are seven planes of consciousness and two dimensions. | T: “Ānanda, there are these seven stations for consciousness and two bases.
dn15:33.2 | S: What seven? | T: What are the seven?
dn15:33.3 | S: There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and diverse in perception, such as human beings, some gods, and some beings in the underworld. | T: “There are, Ānanda, beings who are diverse in body and diverse in perception, such as human beings, some gods, and some beings in the lower realms.
dn15:33.4 | S: This is the first plane of consciousness. | T: This is the first station for consciousness.
dn15:33.5 | S: There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and unified in perception, such as the gods reborn in the Divinity’s host through the first absorption. | T: “There are beings who are diverse in body but identical in perception, such as the gods of the Brahma-order who are generated through the first (jhāna).
dn15:33.6 | S: This is the second plane of consciousness. | T: This is the second station for consciousness.
dn15:33.7 | S: There are sentient beings that are unified in body and diverse in perception, such as the gods of sublime luminosity. | T: “There are beings who are identical in body but diverse in perception, such as the gods of streaming radiance.
dn15:33.8 | S: This is the third plane of consciousness. | T: This is the third station for consciousness.
dn15:33.9 | S: There are sentient beings that are unified in body and unified in perception, such as the gods of universal beauty. | T: “There are beings who are identical in body and identical in perception, such as the gods of refulgent beauty.
dn15:33.10 | S: This is the fourth plane of consciousness. | T: This is the fourth station for consciousness.
dn15:33.11 | S: There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond perceptions of form. With the disappearance of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite’, they have been reborn in the dimension of infinite space. | T: “There are beings who, through the complete surmounting of perceptions of material form, the passing away of perceptions of impingement, and non-attention to perceptions of diversity, (contemplating) ‘Space is infinite,’ arrive at the base of the infinity of space.
dn15:33.12 | S: This is the fifth plane of consciousness. | T: This is the fifth station for consciousness.
dn15:33.13 | S: There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of infinite space. Aware that ‘consciousness is infinite’, they have been reborn in the dimension of infinite consciousness. | T: “There are beings who, having completely surmounted the base of the infinity of space, (contemplating) ‘Consciousness is infinite,’ arrive at the base of the infinity of consciousness.
dn15:33.14 | S: This is the sixth plane of consciousness. | T: This is the sixth station for consciousness.
dn15:33.15 | S: There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness. Aware that ‘there is nothing at all’, they have been reborn in the dimension of nothingness. | T: “There are beings who, having completely surmounted the base of the infinity of consciousness, (contemplating) ‘There is nothing,’ arrive at the base of nothingness.
dn15:33.16 | S: This is the seventh plane of consciousness. | T: This is the seventh station for consciousness.
dn15:33.17 | S: Then there is the dimension of non-percipient beings, and secondly, the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. | T: “The base of non-percipient beings and, second, the base of neither perception nor non-perception—(these are the two bases).
dn15:34.1 | S: Now, regarding these seven planes of consciousness and two dimensions, | T: “Therein, Ānanda, if one understands the first station for consciousness, that of beings who are diverse in body and diverse in perception,
dn15:34.2 | S: is it appropriate for someone who understands them—and their origin, disappearance, gratification, drawback, and escape—to take pleasure in them?” | T: and if one understands its origin, its passing away, its satisfaction, its unsatisfactoriness, and the escape from it, is it proper for one to seek enjoyment in it?”
dn15:34.3 | S: “No, sir.” | T: “Certainly not, venerable sir.”
dn15:34.4 | P: “tatrānanda, yamidaṁ asaññasattāyatanaṁ. | T: “If one understands the remaining stations for consciousness … the base of non-percipient beings … the base of neither perception nor non-perception, and if one understands its origin, its passing away, its satisfaction, its unsatisfactoriness, and the escape from it, is it proper for one to seek enjoyment in it?” “Certainly not, venerable sir.”
dn15:34.5 | P: Yo nu kho, ānanda, tañca pajānāti, tassa ca samudayaṁ pajānāti, tassa ca atthaṅgamaṁ pajānāti, tassa ca assādaṁ pajānāti, tassa ca ādīnavaṁ pajānāti, tassa ca nissaraṇaṁ pajānāti, kallaṁ nu tena tadabhinanditun”ti? | T: (none)
dn15:34.6 | P: “No hetaṁ, bhante”. | T: (none)
dn15:34.7 | P: “Tatrānanda, yamidaṁ nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṁ. | T: (none)
dn15:34.8 | P: Yo nu kho, ānanda, tañca pajānāti, tassa ca samudayaṁ pajānāti, tassa ca atthaṅgamaṁ pajānāti, tassa ca assādaṁ pajānāti, tassa ca ādīnavaṁ pajānāti, tassa ca nissaraṇaṁ pajānāti, kallaṁ nu tena tadabhinanditun”ti? | T: (none)
dn15:34.9 | P: “No hetaṁ, bhante”. | T: (none)
dn15:34.10 | S: “When a mendicant, having truly understood the origin, disappearance, gratification, drawback, and escape regarding these seven planes of consciousness and these two dimensions, is freed by not grasping, they’re called a mendicant who is freed by wisdom. | T: “Ānanda, when a bhikkhu—having understood as they really are the origin, passing away, satisfaction, unsatisfactoriness, and escape in regard to these seven stations for consciousness and two bases—is liberated through non-clinging, then he is called a bhikkhu liberated by wisdom.
dn15:35.0 | S: 6. The Eight Liberations | T: The Eight Emancipations
dn15:35.1 | S: Ānanda, there are these eight liberations. | T: “Ānanda, there are these eight emancipations.
dn15:35.2 | S: What eight? | T: What are the eight?
dn15:35.3 | S: Having physical form, they see forms. | T: “One possessing material form sees material forms.
dn15:35.4 | S: This is the first liberation. | T: This is the first emancipation.
dn15:35.5 | S: Not perceiving form internally, they see forms externally. | T: “One not perceiving material forms internally sees material forms externally.
dn15:35.6 | S: This is the second liberation. | T: This is the second emancipation.
dn15:35.7 | S: They’re focused only on beauty. | T: “One is released upon the idea of the beautiful.
dn15:35.8 | S: This is the third liberation. | T: This is the third emancipation.
dn15:35.9 | S: Going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite’, they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite space. | T: “Through the complete surmounting of perceptions of material form, the passing away of perceptions of impingement, and non-attention to perceptions of diversity, (contemplating) ‘Space is infinite,’ one enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of space.
dn15:35.10 | S: This is the fourth liberation. | T: This is the fourth emancipation.
dn15:35.11 | S: Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite’, they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite consciousness. | T: “Having completely surmounted the base of the infinity of space, (contemplating) ‘Consciousness is infinite,’ one enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of consciousness.
dn15:35.12 | S: This is the fifth liberation. | T: This is the fifth emancipation.
dn15:35.13 | S: Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing at all’, they enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness. | T: “Having completely surmounted the base of the infinity of consciousness, (contemplating) ‘There is nothing,’ one enters and dwells in the base of nothingness.
dn15:35.14 | S: This is the sixth liberation. | T: This is the sixth emancipation.
dn15:35.15 | S: Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. | T: “Having completely surmounted the base of nothingness, one enters and dwells in the base of neither perception nor non-perception.
dn15:35.16 | S: This is the seventh liberation. | T: This is the seventh emancipation.
dn15:35.17 | S: Going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception and feeling. | T: “Having completely surmounted the base of neither perception nor non-perception, one enters and dwells in the cessation of perception and feeling.
dn15:35.18 | S: This is the eighth liberation. | T: This is the eighth emancipation.
dn15:35.19 | S: These are the eight liberations. | T: (none)
dn15:36.1 | S: When a mendicant enters into and withdraws from these eight liberations—in forward order, in reverse order, and in forward and reverse order—wherever they wish, whenever they wish, and for as long as they wish; | T: “Ānanda, when a bhikkhu attains these eight emancipations in forward order, in reverse order, and in both forward order and reverse order; when he attains them and emerges from them wherever he wants, in whatever way he wants, and for as long as he wants,
dn15:36.2 | S: and when they realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, and live having realized it with their own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements, they’re called a mendicant who is freed both ways. | T: and when, through the destruction of the cankers, he here and now enters and dwells in the cankerless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, having realized it for himself with direct knowledge, then he is called a bhikkhu who is liberated in both ways.
dn15:36.3 | S: And, Ānanda, there is no other freedom both ways that is better or finer than this.” | T: And, Ānanda, there is no other liberation in both ways higher or more sublime than this one.”
dn15:36.4 | S: That is what the Buddha said. | T: Thus spoke the Exalted One.
dn15:36.5 | S: Satisfied, Venerable Ānanda approved what the Buddha said. | T: The Venerable Ānanda, being pleased, rejoiced in the Exalted One’s words.
